The Canadian dollar extended recent declines against its U.S. counterpart on Thursday as investors grew more worried about the global economy and the Bank of Canada played down prospects of interest rates rising by more than half a percentage point in any one move.
The loonie was trading 0.6% lower at 1.3070 to the greenback, or 76.51 U.S. cents, after touching its weakest level since November 2020 at 1.3076. "
Wall Street extended recent declines as investors worried that persistently high inflation could provoke increasingly aggressive policy tightening by the Federal Reserve. "
Meanwhile, Bank of Canada Deputy Governor Toni Gravelle said the Canadian central bank's policy rate, at 1%, is "too stimulative" given soaring inflation and needs to return to more neutral levels "quickly."
Canadian government bond yields were lower across the curve, tracking the move in U.S. Treasuries.

The country's trade surplus with the world narrowed to $2.66 billion (US$2.14 billion), below analyst forecasts of $2.9 billion.
But exports came in above expectations at $58.75 billion, with imports at $56.08 billion.
Canada's economy now 1.2% above pre-pandemic level after nine months of growth.
Half of businesses surveyed by the Canadian Chamber of Commerce say rising costs are biggest challenge.
The crisis also has pushed up imports, with Canada's imports of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals hitting a record high.

Canada's central bank will aim to keep the annual pace of price gains at its historic target rate, but will now more formally take into account the health of the job market as part of its inflation-targeting regime.
A new framework agreement between the federal government and the Bank of Canada announced Monday keeps at its heart a two-per-cent annual inflation rate.
Since 1991, the Bank of Canada has targeted an annual inflation rate of between one and three per cent, often landing in a sweet spot at two per cent.
As it stands, the bank doesn't see a rate bump until April 2022 at the earliest.
Under the agreement Monday, the central bank said the rate may more often hit rock-bottom and remain there for longer if the bank believes it will help get inflation back on target.b A low-for-longer rate environment may sometimes be needed, the bank said, even if it boosts the likelihood that inflation could overshoot the two per cent target as the economy recovers.

In Canada, the cost of living is on an upward spiral with gas prices reaching record highs and food getting pricier with every trip to the grocery store. "
And with no end in sight to the war in Ukraine, incited by Russian President Vladimir Putin on Feb. 24, prices aren't expected to go down anytime soon, experts say.
In the next three to five months, Canada will see the prices of grain-based products rise.
Prices in Canada, both gas and food, will remain dependent on the conflict to the east, he said. "
Gas prices will also stay on the rise in Canada with Diesel, known as the "fuel the world runs on," getting shorter in supply according to McTeague.
Additionally, farmers are still dealing with the supply chain issues related to COVID-19, which have plagued a variety of industries across the world for months.
Many producers are struggling to get machinery into their fields, with semiconductor and parts shortages that have delayed new car shipments also hitting tractors and other farm equipment.
At the pump, drivers will continue to see the price of gas rise, said McTeague. "
Around this time last year, the average gas price in Canada sat at 1.24/L. Now with over a 60 cent increase, this isn't like anything Canada has ever seen. "
I think everyone is noticing higher prices at the gas pump," said Charlebois.
Vancouver has watched the price reach over $2 a litre.

The Government of Canada has committed to investing in job creation to grow the economy and increase the prosperity of Canadians.
Support for local community economic development is a Government of Canada priority.
Acting on behalf of the honourable Navdeep Bains, Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development and Minister responsible for CED, Joël Lightbound, MP for Louis-Hébert, confirmed that a three-year agreement had been signed with the Corporation de développement économique communautaire (CDEC) de Québec for financial assistance in the form of a non-repayable contribution of $712,500 that the organization will use to support economic development in the community.
More specifically, the contribution provided under CED's Quebec Economic Development Program (QEDP) will help the CDEC de Québec develop and implement original solutions adapted to the area's devitalization issues, while supporting the emergence and consolidation of community businesses