The employment and social situation in
Germany
The original full study1 of the labour market and social situation in Germany looks into
major employment trends including atypical employment, unemployment and
underemployment. It presents policy responses and major challengesfor the future,
such as digitisation and demographic change. Further, it explores policy action to fight
poverty, trends in the German social partnership model and in the skills development
system. Finally, it describes the contribution of the European Social Fund. The note
covers aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Background
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs of the European Parliament has
requested an analysis of the employment and social situation in Germany in the context
of Germany's presidency of the Council of the European Union (EU) from July to
December 2020.
Key findings
Recenttrends in Germany includesteady growth in employmentafter the global economic crisis of 2008 driven by
increased employment rates –in particular among women, older workers as well as migrants. Part-time employment,
especially for women,expanded,and the female employment rate grew by 13.6 percentage points, from 58.5% in 2004
to 72.1% in 2018. The number of employed persons with foreign citizenshipdoubled between 2009 and 2019.
As a result of the increased demand for labour, the
unemployment rate decreased to 3.2% in January 2020 and
the long-term unemployment (LTU) rate fellto a low of 34%
(2018, LFS data). The unemployment rate of young people
is even slightly below that of adults.
The number of mini-jobbers remained at a high level,
though decreasing following the introduction of the
minimum wage in 2015. In June 2019, there were as many
as 7.9 million mini-jobbers, compared to 33.41 million
employees subject to social security contributions. Of these
marginal part-time employees, 62.1% had the mini-job as
their only form of employment. The share of employees with fixed-term employment contracts was 8.3% in 2018.The
number of temporary agency workersreached a peak in 2017 anddecreasedto 2% of all employed personsin 2019.
In line with recent active labour market programmes, a major proportion of the European Social Fund (EUR
885 million) focused on reducing long-term unemployment and bringing disadvantaged young people into
education (in particular VET). Also, recent policies have successfully targeted refugees and asylum seekers, and the
Federal Inclusion Act of 2016 promotes measures for a wider inclusion of people with disabilities in terms of
employment.

The employment and social situation in Germany
Current major challenges include the first signs of
slowing down of employment growth. Leading
economic research institutes predict a severe economic
recession at least for 2020 as an effect of the COVID-19
pandemic (German GDP to shrink by 3-6%).
Furthermore, in 2017, 7.9 million persons earned wages
below the low-wage threshold (i.e. 2/3 of the median
gross hourly wage) which remains a challenge due to
low mobility. Furthermore, the German society is ageing
and facing shortages of nurses and carers for older
people in need of care.
Although Germany is well known for its social
partnership model, trade unions have seen declining
memberships over several decades, and an increasing
share of workers are not covered by a collective
bargaining or Works Council agreement.
In terms of skills, the dual vocational education and training system is one of the main success factors lowering
unemployment amongyoung people andskill gaps. However, the number of young people enrolling in this system
is fallinginfavour of university education. To tackle skills shortagesfaced by the dual vocational education and training
(VET) system, various actions were undertaken, including setting up an Alliance for Initial and Continuing Education
and Training; measures to integrate disadvantaged youth into dual vocational education and training; and the
introduction of new formats of study coursessuch as dual bachelor courses.
Furthermore, to promote lifelong learning, several measures and laws have been introduced over the past few years:
the Qualification Opportunity Act(2019)includes a binding right to guidance onfurther trainingby the Federal
Employment Agency. In addition, it extends subsidised training to employees affected by structural change. To address
skill shortages and the threat of skill shortages (mostly in the health sector, construction sector and some
manufacturing industries, as well as in ICT roles across all sectors), the federal parliament adopted the Skilled Workers
Immigration Law (2020), which eases immigrationto Germany of highly skilled workers and of VET workers from third
countries. Furthermore, in June 2019, a new national strategy was adopted to address the challenges of increasing
digital transformation in the workplace. Digitisation is expected to have considerable structural effects on the
German labour market. Evenif the recentlabour market prognosis estimatesthat up to 2035, only 300,000 workers will
be replaced by new technologies, the contentof many jobswill change, thusimplying an increased need for vocational
adaptation.
Good economic performance in Germany over the past decade contributed to reducing poverty. A statutory
minimum wage introduced in 2015 had positive effects on wages in the lowest income groups. Nevertheless, a
number of social problemsremain acute: many children living atrisk of poverty (17.3% in 2018) or inpoverty, and a
lack of equity and social mobility of the education system. A relatively low replacement level, together with an increase
of the retirement age, have triggered a revision of the basic pension. Affordable housinghas become a major problem,
not only for low-income but also middle-income households, above all in urban areas.
As a response to the COVID-19 pandemic,Germany has facilitated access to existingshort-time work arrangements.
A survey conducted by the Hans-Böckler Foundation, published in April 2020, suggests that in mid-April about
4millionworkerswere included in the short-time work scheme.

Social inequality in Germany is on the rise
Germany's poor are getting poorer, and the rich richer. A new government report has made clear how wide the country's
social divide is growing.

More and more people in Germany have precariously low incomes
Djamila Kordus is a brave woman. The trained retail saleswoman ventured onto television on the ARD talk show "Hart aber fair" on May 10,
for the segment titled, "Poor despite work — is social advancement an empty promise?"
Kordus is a single mother and money is always tight. Although she has a full-time job at a large online retailer as a warehouse clerk, she says
she is left with around €500 ($610) to live on per month after deducting all her fixed costs.

Being poor despite work is becoming an increasingly common reality in Germany. That much is confirmed by the German Labor Ministry's
latest poverty and wealth report, which Chancellor Angela Merkel's Cabinet approved on Wednesday. Its results will be debated in the
Bundestag in June.
The government compiles the 500-page report every four years, and it is supposed to give an overview of the social situation in Germany. At
the moment, this looks rather bleak: The gap between rich and poor in Germany is widening, a situation that has been aggravated by the
coronavirus pandemic. For opposition parties, trade unions, and social associations, this is an alarm signal.
For Joachim Rock, researcher and labor department head at the Paritätische Wohlfahrtsverband, one of Germany's largest associations of
charity organizations, "the report shows that the crisis has hit the poorest the hardest."
Rock told DW that during the coronavirus crisis more than ever, people with low incomes would have had a high risk of "losing their jobs and
income." Rich people, he says, would have struggled significantly less.
Poor in Germany
But what does being poor mean in Germany? Are people only poor if they don't have a roof over their heads, collect deposit bottles to make
ends meet, or live on state support? Or could it also include the people who have a full-time job but cannot live on their wages?
In Germany, this is precisely defined. A person is categorized as poor if they live on less than 60% of the median net wage, which is currently
€1,176 ($1,429) a month. The rich are those who receive a monthly net salary of more than €3,900. However, this would also include the
super-rich, such as the owner of the Lidl supermarket chain, Dieter Schwarz, whose private wealth is estimated at over €20 billion.
The proportion of rich people in Germany has continued to rise in recent years, the latest poverty and wealth report shows, as has the
proportion of poor people. Meanwhile, the middle-income bracket continues to shrink.

This situation has been exacerbated by the coronavirus. In a survey for the report, about a quarter of households said their incomes had
shrunk during the pandemic, with low- and medium-income earners hardest hit. Many of the respondents with particularly low incomes had
struggled to meet current expenses since the pandemic began. The income risks associated with the pandemic were "greater in the lower
income brackets," the report continued, in part because these people had "little in the way of reserves or other financial flexibility."
Rock, of the Paritätische Wohlfahrtsverband, has long noted that incomes in Germany develop very differently: "While people with low
incomes often suffered real income losses, higher incomes grew much more strongly. Wealth is distributed very unevenly: The richest half of
the population has 99.5% of the assets." Around 3.8% of the population has very high net wealth, which means they own more than half a
million euros, usually in real estate, financial investments, or business assets.

The report has sparked much government criticism from Germany's political opposition. Green Party leader Katrin Göring-Eckardt said the
growing gap between rich and poor and the experience of more and more people being left hanging in the crisis is poison for social cohesion.
Katja Kipping, the social policy spokeswoman of the socialist Left Party, told DW, "The neoliberal promise of upward mobility is revealing
itself to be an empty promise, at least for poorer classes."
Poor report card for the Merkel years
Rock gives Chancellor Angela Merkel rather poor grades for her time in government. "Inequality in Germany has grown significantly over the
past 16 years," he said. "The social reforms that came into force in 2005 have contributed significantly to this: in 1995, only 15% of the
unemployed lived in poverty; in 2005, it was already over 35%, and in 2015, almost two-thirds."
There are political consequences to this. Historical trends show that the lower the income, the lower the political engagement and the
willingness to vote. The current government will not be able to change the situation much in the few months before the election, but it is
already clear that the issue of social justice will play a major role in the upcoming campaign. Will there be a new wealth tax? Does the
minimum wage have to rise?

From rags to riches — very unrealistic
And another finding has emerged from the government analysis: The promise of social advancement remains mostly unfulfilled for poorer
people and their children. According to the report, people in the low-wage sector and their children have very little chance of advancement.
For people like Djamila Kordus, the single mother from Berlin, the government report must seem pretty sobering. But one thing is out of the
question for her: Drawing government aid instead of going to work. "I grew up thinking that work is the most important thing," she said on
the TV show. She also wants to be a role model for her daughter. "If I just sit at home, what are the kids going to do later?"
This article has been translated from German.
While you're here: Every Tuesday DW editors round-up for you what is happening in German politics and society, with an
eye toward understanding this year’s elections and beyond. Sign up here for the weekly e-mail newsletter "Berlin Briefing," to
stay on top of developments as Germany enters the post-Merkel era.

Germany's Economy, Its Successes and

Challenges

Germany's economy is expected to produce $4.2 trillion
[1]
in 2019 as measured
by nominal gross domestic product. The nation is the world's fourth-largest
economy following the United States, China, and Japan. To compare countries'
GDPs, you must use purchasing power parity. Some say that Germany flourished
as Chancellor Angela Merkel led the country to robust economic growth and
record-low unemployment rates.

Germany's Economic Growth Statistics
In 2017, Germany's GDP growth rate was 2.4% better than it had been in the
previous year. Germany's GDP per capita was $46,749 in 2017, better than the
2016 average of $45,923. It's lower than the $53,129 enjoyed in the United States
and less than the European Union overall at $36,593.

Modernization of Eastern Germany costs $70 billion per year

[2] at first. By

2008, spending had dropped to $12 billion.
1.

High unemployment (9.5%) and an aging population (20% aged 65+). That
means Germany depletes its Social Security fund faster than it can add to
it via payroll taxes.
2.

Germany managed to get its budget deficit below 3% of GDP, as mandated
by the EU. It lowered fiscal spending, and the country advocates this
method to solve the Greek debt crisis.

Type of Economy
Germany has a mixed economy. It allows a free market economy in consumer
goods and business services. But the government imposes regulations even in
those areas to protect its citizens. Germany has a command economy in defense
since everyone receives the benefit, while those with higher incomes pay more
in taxes. The government provides health care insurance and education. That
means you pay into the system according to your income and receive benefits
according to your need.

Benefits From Eurozone Membership
Germany benefits from its membership in the EU and its adoption of the euro.
Like many other eurozone members, the power of the euro means interest rates
stay low, which has spurred investment.
In fact, many say that Germany profits the most from its membership. Its strong
manufacturing base means it has plenty to export to other members of the
eurozone and does so more cheaply, giving German companies a competitive
advantage that only improves over time. That creates prosperity, giving German
consumers more money to spend locally. As a result, the domestic market
recently became a more significant driver of economic growth.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel
Current Chancellor Angela Merkel was a physicist and economic reformer from
East Germany. She won the 2005 election by promising reform to lower the 11.5%
unemployment rate.

How Germany Overcame Historic Struggles With
Unemployment
In 2017, unemployment was 3.8%. That's better than the 7.7% rate during the
recession. Germany struggled with high unemployment for historical and
cultural reasons.
First, Germany's laws made it difficult to lay off workers and lower wages.
Second, the reunification of East and West Germany after the fall of the Berlin
Wall heightened unemployment. The economy had to absorb workers from the
former Communist bloc. Third, the culture supports saving for a rainy day rather
than spending that would boost the economy.
Unemployment would have been worse in Germany were it not for reforms
launched between 1998 through 2005. The government-subsidized businesses
to reduce working hours. That kept people employed during the recession,
although only part-time.

Unique German-Russian Relations
While president of the EU in 2007, Merkel met with Russia’s President Vladimir
Putin at his private country retreat, Bocharov Ruchey, in Sochi. Merkel and Putin
enjoyed a relatively cordial relationship. That was thanks to Putin’s fluency in
German and Merkel’s schooling in then-Communist Eastern Germany, which
gives her a good command of Russian.
Merkel arrived just one week after Russia cut off gas supplies to Belarus, which
carried the main pipeline to Europe. Merkel got assurances that Putin’s pipeline
politics would not affect the EU's or Germany's energy supply. Russia does not
want to jeopardize German foreign direct investment in Russia or bilateral trade.
Putin also agreed to:
• A new EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement

5/15/22, 10:52 AM Germany: GDP and Economic Facts

https://www.thebalance.com/germany-s-economy-3306346 4/7
ARTICLE SOURCES
Acceleration of a gas pipeline construction to Germany under the Baltic
Sea
Construction of an oil pipeline leading to Russia's Pacific Coast, to avoid
going through “transit countries” Ukraine, Belarus, and Poland
Establishment of a gas reservoir in Germany, adding a new distribution
center for Russian gas

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
How much money does Germany have?
Gross domestic product (GDP) offers one way of measuring the amount of
money in an economy. The German GDP in 2020 was $3.85 trillion.

[3] You can't
measure the amount of currency circulating in Germany, because it uses the
euro with other EU nations. In total, there are roughly 28 billion euros in
circulation as coin or paper currency, but this figure isn't limited to Germany.
[4]

How does Germany make money?
Manufacturing accounts for nearly a quarter of Germany's GDP. Th automotive,
mechanical engineering, chemical, and electrical industries are the most
significant. Major companies in Germany include Volkswagen, BASF, and
Siemens.
[5]

Germany’s economic growth slowed from 2017 through 2019,
turned negative in 2020, and resumed at a modest level in
2021. However, the country’s lackluster trend of economic
freedom over the past five years has brightened Boosted by
substantial score increases in rule of law (property rights,
judicial effectiveness, and government integrity), Germany
has recorded a 2.3-point overall gain in economic freedom
since 2017 and has moved into the upper half of the “Mostly
Free” category for the first time in the history of the Index.
Fiscal health and business freedom are robust, but scores for
government spending and tax burden remain low.
IMPACT OF COVID-19: As of December 1, 2021, 102,183 deaths
had been attributed to the pandemic in Germany, and the
government’s response to the crisis ranked 8th among the
countries included in this Index in terms of its stringency. The
economy contracted by 4.9 percent in 2020.

Germany remains the European Union’s most politically and
economically influential member nation. Former Chancellor
Angela Merkel, who dominated German politics for 16 years,
was succeeded by Olaf Scholz, who became only the fourth
Social Democratic chancellor since the end of World War II
by forming a complicated coalition government with the
BACKGROUND

environmentalist Alliance ‘90/Greens and the market-liberal
Free Democrats after September 2021 elections. Germany’s
solid economy, the world’s fourth largest and Europe’s
largest, is based on exports of high-quality manufactured
goods. Germany has come under fire from other European
countries and the United States for its inadequate defense
spending, continued construction of a second natural gas
pipeline link with Russia, and economic ties to China.

Real and intellectual property are well
protected, and contracts are enforced. The
judicial system is independent, and the
government does not interfere in the court
system. Cases of public corruption are rare,
although some sectors, including the
automotive industry, construction sector, and
public contracting, exert political influence. The financing of political parties
remains only partially transparent.

The top individual income tax rate is 47.5
percent, and the federal corporate tax rate is
15.8 percent (effectively above 30 percent
with other taxes). The overall tax burden
equals 38.8 percent of total domestic income.
Government spending has amounted to 46.7
percent of total output (GDP) over the past
three years, and budget deficits have averaged 0.3 percent of GDP. Public debt
is equivalent to 68.9 percent of GDP.

Regulatory and accounting systems are
complex but fair. Infrastructure is reliable, and
the social climate is attractive. Germany ranks
seventh among the 27 EU members for
average labor cost. Labor laws make the
hiring and dismissing of employees
problematic. Inflation in historically fiscally and monetarily conservative Germany
rose significantly to nearly 3 percent in 2021, partly because of sharply rising
natural gas prices across Europe.

As a member of the EU, Germany has 46
preferential trade agreements in force. The
trade-weighted average tariff rate (common
among EU members) is 2.9 percent with 640
RULE OF LAW

Property Rights 95.7
Judicial Effectiveness 95.3
Government Integrity 89.4

GOVERNMENT SIZE

Tax Burden 59.9
Government Spending 34.5
Fiscal Health 90.4

REGULATORY EFFICIENCY

Business Freedom 87.2
Labor Freedom 52.3
Monetary Freedom 79.5

OPEN MARKETS

Trade Freedom 79.2
Investment Freedom 80.0
Financial Freedom 70.0

Germany is the world’s fourth-largest economy, highly innovative and has a

strong focus on exports. The future lies in Industry 4.0.

Germany is the largest economy in the (EU) and the fourth largest in the world after

the USA, China, and Japan. The German economy has its great innovativeness (/en/germany-
glance/vibrant-hub-knowledge) and strong focus on exports to thank for its competitiveness and global

networking. In high-selling sectors, such as car-making, mechanical and plant engineering, the chemicals
industry and medical technology, exports account for well over half of total sales. In 2018, only China and
the USA exported more goods. Germany’s (/en/germany-glance/land-diversity) most important trading
partners are the European Union countries, the USA, and China. In 2018 Germany invested 104.8 billion
euros in research and development (R&D). For most German companies, the mega-trends of digitisation
(Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, Blockchain, cyber security, smart systems, e-commerce) present a
major challenge. At the same time, they offer opportunities for a productive and growing start-up scene in
Germany.

Small and medium-sized enterprises and industry
USA China Japan Germany United
Kingdom

0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000

Accounting for more than 99 percent of all companies, small and medium-sized enterprises ( )
form the backbone of the economy and are also characterised by their high share of industrial production.
They supplement the corporations listed primarily in the DAX index at the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, the
most important financial centre in Continental Europe. The European Central Bank, which as an EU
institution amongst other things is the guardian of the ’s stability, is also headquartered in
Frankfurt/Main.
The positive economic momentum of the 2010s has led to a favourable trend on the labour market.
Germany is one of the countries with the highest employment rates in the EU and is the country with the
lowest youth unemployment percentage. This underscores the value of dual , which
has become an commodity in its own right and is being adapted by many countries. Factors such
as the availability of skilled labour, infrastructure, and legal certainty are further characteristics of Germany,
which is very high on the list in many international rankings. Peter Altmaier (CDU) heads the Federal
Ministry (/en/politics-germany/joint-tasks) for Economic Affairs and Energy.

A social market economy as the basis

Consequences of the Corona pandemic

China USA Germany Japan Netherlands Other

12.8%
8.6%

8%

63.1%

Since 1949 the idea of a has formed the basis of German .
The social market economy guarantees free entrepreneurial activity while at the same time endeavouring to
create social checks and balances. Formulated in the post-War years by Ludwig Erhard, who was later to
become , the concept has kept Germany’s economic development on a successful
track. Germany actively engages in shaping globalisation and champions a sustainable global economic
system, which offers fair opportunities to everyone.
Germany is one of the 12 countries which introduced the in 2002. The financial market crisis
(2008) and the subsequent debt crisis affected the whole of the Eurozone, Germany included. To combat
adverse impacts, the employed a twin-track strategy, which involved not taking on
any new debt and adopting measures to bolster innovativeness. Since 2014 the government has been able to
present a balanced federal budget six times in a row.

Consequences of the Corona pandemic

China USA Germany Japan Netherlands Other

12.8%
8.6%

8%

63.1%

Since 1949 the idea of a has formed the basis of German .
The social market economy guarantees free entrepreneurial activity while at the same time endeavouring to
create social checks and balances. Formulated in the post-War years by Ludwig Erhard, who was later to
become , the concept has kept Germany’s economic development on a successful
track. Germany actively engages in shaping globalisation and champions a sustainable global economic
system, which offers fair opportunities to everyone.
Germany is one of the 12 countries which introduced the in 2002. The financial market crisis
(2008) and the subsequent debt crisis affected the whole of the Eurozone, Germany included. To combat
adverse impacts, the employed a twin-track strategy, which involved not taking on
any new debt and adopting measures to bolster innovativeness. Since 2014 the government has been able to
present a balanced federal budget six times in a row.

social market economy (#) economic policy (#)

Federal Chancellor (#)

euro (#)

Federal Government (#)

As a result of the Coronavirus crisis in the spring of 2020, economic experts expect a sharp economic
downturn, a rise in the unemployment rate and, as a consequence of the financial stabilisation measures, a
record deficit in the national budget. However, in their April 2020 joint forecast the experts from the major
institutes for economic research predict that Germany will cope with the economic slump and in the
medium term achieve economic output levels on a par with what it would have had without the crisis.