Social and economic changes
The development of industry drove many social and intellectual changes. After the Treaty of Shimonoseki, the government utilized the Chinese indemnity to subsidize the development of the Yawata Iron and Steel Works, which were established in 1897 and began production in 1901. Yawata significantly expanded Japan’s heavy industry sector, but it depended on China for its ores. The growing textile and other consumer goods industries expanded both to meet Japanese needs and to earn the capital required for the import of raw materials. Heavy industry was encouraged by government-controlled banks, and strategic industries such as steel and railways were in government hands. Most new growth was in the private sector, however, although it remained somewhat concentrated in the hands of the zaibatsu financial and industrial giants.

The industrial labour force numbered about 400,000 workers in 1895. Police action restricted the growth of labour unions, and socialist movements were quickly repressed. In 1903 the Heimin Shimbun (“Commoner’s Newspaper”) published The Communist Manifesto and opposed the Russo-Japanese War in the name of the workers of Russia and Japan before it was forced to cease publication. The Christian pacifist Uchimura Kanzo joined in these antiwar protests but later parted company with the socialists. The labour and socialist movements gained in strength after World War I, but they had many handicaps. Leadership usually had little real contact with the workers because of police repression. The challenge of organizing across the vast industrial empires of Mitsui and Mitsubishi also kept the labour movement from making headway. The increasing confidence and power of management, which came to influence and at times control the political parties, were in marked contrast to the slow progress of the labour movement. The Katō government of 1924–26 was sometimes referred to as a “Mitsubishi cabinet” because of its close relations to that company’s interests and families. In 1928 a revision of the law passed under Katō made it a capital crime to agitate against private property or Japanese “national essence” (kokutai).

In the countryside, farm villages provided the bulk of the labourers for the new industries, and rural women were to be found in many of the textile plants. The early decades of the 20th century were not years of agricultural prosperity, however. Increased tenancy resulted in the growth of tenant organizations, and government efforts to encourage voluntary reform measures brought only a 1924 law for mediation of disputes between tenants and landlords. This made little real impact. The financial panic of 1927 aggravated rural conditions and indebtedness, and the collapse of the U.S. silk market in 1929 spelled disaster for the farmers and workers alike.

The most-lasting social changes were those found in the great metropolitan centres where the growing labour force and the new middle class “salary” groups were concentrated. The Tokyo-Yokohama area was devastated by a great earthquake in September 1923, and its reconstruction as a modern metropolis symbolized the growth and orientation of the urban society. Japanese popular culture during and after World War I drew from international sources, most conspicuously the United States. Western music and sports achieved inroads, and the rising standards of living produced the need for better access to higher education. Women shared in the changes, and the participation of women in the workforce gave rise to a feminist movement. While the gains achieved were halting at best, the Japanese family system was undergoing dramatic changes.

The educated class grew in size, embracing beliefs ranging from Western-style democracy to the new radicalism of the Soviet Union. Unfortunately, the foundation for these new currents of liberalism was unstable. Universal manhood suffrage was achieved, but political expression was checked by the Tokubetsu Kōtō Keisatsu (“Special Higher Police”), or Tokkô, a police force which was established to prevent the spread of “dangerous thoughts.” Economically, the urban classes were dependent upon the continuance of the favourable trade patterns of the 1920s. When the Great Depression at the end of the decade wrecked Japan’s foreign markets, many were prepared to listen to charges that party politicians had imperiled Japan while enriching themselves.

The rise of the militarists
The idea that military conquest could solve Japan’s economic problems was not new, but the hardships of the Great Depression gave it increased prominence. One of the key arguments advanced to support aggressive militarism was that it posed a solution to the problem of surplus population. Japan’s population had grown from 30 million at the time of the Meiji Restoration to almost 65 million in 1930. Each year the problem grew worse; the imports of needed foodstuffs increased, while Western tariffs limited exports. It was also argued that discrimination was a barrier to Japanese emigration to many areas. The so-called Gentlemen’s Agreement with U.S. Pres. Theodore Roosevelt succeeded in removing legal barriers in California, but bias and prejudice continued. Japanese were barred from Australia altogether. Efforts made by Japan and China to secure a racial equality clause in the League of Nations covenant were frustrated by Western statesmen who feared the anger of their constituents. With economic avenues closed, militarists argued that force was Japan’s only option.

The armed services distrusted the political parties and opposed several international agreements which the civilian governments accepted. The Washington Conference limited Japan’s naval strength, and in 1930 the government of Prime Minister Hamaguchi Osachi accepted the London Naval Conference limitations on cruiser strength. The Katō government reduced the size of the army by four divisions. Many service leaders also bridled under the moderation that Foreign Minister Shidehara showed during the Nationalist Party’s Northern Expedition in 1926–27, and they would have preferred that Japan be much more militarily assertive in China. Prime Minister Tanaka Giichi reversed Shidehara’s policy by intervening in Shandong in 1927 and 1928, but Tanaka was forced out in 1929 and replaced by Hamaguchi, under whom Shidehara resumed control of the foreign office. It seemed to many in the military that such inconsistency had earned Japan the enmity of China without gaining any obvious advantage.

Many military leaders resented the restrictions that the civilian governments placed upon them, and, because they had direct access to the throne and possessed the ability to break a cabinet by refusing their cooperation, their power was considerable. Such views were not held by all or even most of the high command; many politically savvy senior officers approved of party government, and navy leaders tended to be more discreet. However, enough army officers embraced this position that it became a possible focus for dissatisfaction among other groups in Japanese society. The image of the frugal, selfless samurai was peculiarly useful as a contrast to the stock characterization of the selfish party politician.

These internal clashes were exploited by groups of civilian ultranationalists who opposed parliamentary government on principle. Since Meiji times, there had been a number of rightist organizations dedicated to Japanese cultural purity and external military expansion. They sought to preserve what they believed to be unique in the Japanese spirit and therefore fought against excessive Westernization. There were many such organizations, the most important of which drew inspiration from the ultranationalist Tōyama Mitsuru. Most of the organizations were opposed to political parties and big business as well as Westernization, and, by allying with rightist forces, civilian and military, they alternately terrorized and intimidated their presumed opponents.

Junior officers in the armed services were a receptive audience for the far right theorists, and they would prove to be the strongest force against parliamentary government. Many of them were animated by goals that were national socialist in character. Kita Ikki, a former socialist who had embraced nationalism and militarism, wrote in An Outline Plan for the Reorganization of Japan that the Meiji Constitution should be set aside in favour of a revolutionary regime. Ikki’s military government would nationalize many forms of property, place limits on wealth, end party rule, and assume the leadership role in a revolution that would sweep Asia. Kita helped persuade a number of young officers to take part in the violence of the 1930s, and in large measure their plots were designed to create a disorder so great that military government would follow. Once this had been achieved, they thought, the army would know what to do next.


Japan’s economic freedom score is 69.9, making its economy the 35th freest in the 2022 Index. Japan is ranked 6th among 39 countries in the Asia–Pacific region, and its overall score is above the regional and world averages.

Economic growth in Japan slowed to zero in 2019, turned negative in 2020, and rebounded in 2021. Economic freedom had been expanding slowly, but with higher scores for property rights and judicial effectiveness just barely outpacing declines in business freedom and labor freedom, Japan has managed to record only a 0.3-point overall gain of economic freedom since 2017 and is currently at the top of the “Moderately Free” category. The rule of law remains strong, but fiscal health is extremely weak.

IMPACT OF COVID-19: As of December 1, 2021, 18,358 deaths had been attributed to the pandemic in Japan, and the government’s response to the crisis ranked 62nd among the countries included in this Index in terms of its stringency. The economy contracted by 4.8 percent in 2020.

Close
Background
Japan has long been a global economic power. In September 2020, Shinzo Abe resigned as prime minister, having set a record as the longest-serving Japanese leader. His successor, former Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, lasted only a year before declining to seek reelection. Former Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida was elected in October 2021 vowing to maintain Japan’s foreign and security policies. Suga was heavily criticized for Japan’s slow response to the COVID-19 pandemic, but Kishida faces an improved COVID situation and is vowing to implement strong fiscal stimulus measures to reinvigorate Japan’s sluggish economy. The public wants strong reforms to remedy Japan’s endemic economic problems but fears the upheaval that such measures could cause.

Rule of Law
Property Rights 94.6 Create a Graph using this measurement

Judicial Effectiveness 95.3 Create a Graph using this measurement

Government Integrity 81.4 Create a Graph using this measurement

Secured interests in real property are recognized and enforced effectively. Japan’s judiciary is independent and fair. Levels of corruption are low, but close relationships among companies, politicians, and government agencies foster an inwardly cooperative business climate that is conducive to favoritism. Amakudari (granting retired government officials top positions within Japanese companies) is common in some sectors.

Government Size
Tax Burden 67.4 Create a Graph using this measurement

Government Spending 52.5 Create a Graph using this measurement

Fiscal Health 19.7 Create a Graph using this measurement

The top individual income tax rate is 40.8 percent, and the top corporate tax rate is 23.9 percent, which local taxes and an enterprise tax can increase significantly. The overall tax burden equals 32.0 percent of total domestic income. Government spending has amounted to 39.8 percent of total output (GDP) over the past three years, and budget deficits have averaged 6.1 percent of GDP. Public debt is equivalent to 256.2 percent of GDP.

Regulatory Efficiency
Business Freedom 78.3 Create a Graph using this measurement

Labor Freedom 66.6 Create a Graph using this measurement

Monetary Freedom 87.1 Create a Graph using this measurement

Most state-owned enterprises have been privatized. The third phase of power-sector reforms took effect in 2020. Due to the shrinking labor force, a law was revised to ask companies to “make efforts” to employ workers between 65 and 70 years old. The government has doubled the value of subsidies aimed at promoting electric vehicles on condition that such vehicles are charged with renewable energy including solar power.

Open Markets
Trade Freedom 75.4 Create a Graph using this measurement

Investment Freedom 60.0 Create a Graph using this measurement

Financial Freedom 60.0 Create a Graph using this measurement

Japan has 18 preferential trade agreements in force. The trade-weighted average tariff rate is 2.3 percent, and 401 nontariff measures are in effect. The government screens foreign investment in some sectors. The financial sector is competitive, but state involvement persists. The government has expanded the volume of concessional loans, which are interest free without collateral, primarily for small and medium-size firms affected by the pandemic.


In the 1980s, Japan's economy was the envy of the world. It grew by leaps and bounds, seemingly ready to bypass the U.S. to become world's largest economy. But then it didn't. An asset bubble that had built up during the 1980's burst in 1990, causing Japan's economy to falter. This pushed Japan's economy into a period of prolonged stagnation and deflation, a period known as the "Lost Decade," now plural, which has continued to the present day.

Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the Japanese government have tried a host of different measures to get the economy moving. For instance, the BOJ was the first central bank to ever implement Quantitative Easing (QE), a monetary policy of asset-buying, which sought to drive long interest rates to near-zero levels. The second Shinzo Abe administration, which took office in 2012, introduced the three programs of “Abenomics” to try to revive the economy. These were an aggressively expansionary monetary policy, increased government spending, and changes to regulation to increase trade and growth.

While these policies kept the Japanese economy from sliding into a prolonged recession or even a depression, they failed to move it out of stagnation.

Compounding the woes of the Japanese economy was the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020-21, which badly damaged its economy. For instance, real GDP declined at an annualized rate of over 32% in the second quarter of 2020, before recovering by only just over 20% the next quarter with more muted rises and falls over the next few quarters. Japans GDP, as of Q3 2021, remains below pre-pandemic levels.

Looking into 2022, Japan's economy faces several challenges, like keeping the economic recovery going, diversifying investments away from China, and addressing its demographic problems.
Key Takeaways
Since 1990, the Japanese economy has suffered from economic stagnation, and COVID-19 has worsened the situation.
Japan's recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is incomplete, and keeping it going will be critical.
Supply chain issues, rising labor costs, and political issues have highlighted problems with Japan's reliance on China as a base for its manufacturing investments.
With a low birthrate and aging population, Japan's social security system is under strain and is suffering from labor shortages.
Keeping the Recovery Going
As is the case with other developed countries around the world, Japan's policymakers have been trying to keep the economic recovery going with fiscal stimuli, like a $1 trillion stimulus ​package that was instituted by the Japanese government in the spring of 2021, which Kishida, has agreed to continue and supplement with a new $944 billion budget for fiscal 2022.

But keeping the economic recovery going hasn't been easy around the world due to the supply chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which create temporary mismatches between the demand and supply side of the economy. As a result, economic growth has slowed down, as prices of goods and services spike, especially the price of food and energy

While rising food and energy prices are a problem for every country, it's even more severe for Japan, which is highly dependent on oil imports for its energy needs. High oil prices take a big chunk of household budgets, depressing further consumer spending, the primary factor behind the country's three-decade-old stagnation. Nonetheless, overall inflation still remains low, verging on deflation. Consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 0.1% in October, the same as in September, and well below the 2% Bank of Japan target, which it has struggled to meet for years.
Diversifying Investments Away From China
For years, China was a focus of manufacturing investment for Japan. China's cheap labor force provided a solution to Japan's labor shortage, helping its manufacturers stay competitive in the global economy. Meanwhile, China became a significant market for Japanese products.

In recent years, things have changed for a couple of reasons. One of them is that China's labor is no longer cheap, as the country is facing its own labor shortages, eroding its competitive advantage. In 2018, China's manufacturing labor costs $5.51 dollars per hour, well above the $4.45 in Mexico, and $2.73 in Vietnam.

Secondly, renewed tensions between the two countries over China's aggressive expansion in the South China Sea and military exercises near Taiwan.

Addressing Japan's Demographic Problem
Demographics is a chronic social and economic problem for Japan. Since the 1970s birth rates in Japan have plunged. This means fewer young people are entering the labor force leading to a decline in the country's productive potential.

The lack of young people, combined with very long lifespans, creates a very unfavorable dependency ratio. That's ratio of people paying into the country's social security fund to the number of retired people collecting from it. As a result, the social security fund runs deficits, which the Japanese government must cover from its fiscal budget. For instance, the 2022 fiscal budget allocates 660 billion yen to make up for a shortfall in the social security fund, up from an initial estimate of 480 billion yen. This shortfall is covered by issuing debt, and Japan's national debt is currently at 266% of GDP, the highest ratio in the developed world

But addressing demographic problems isn't something that can be addressed quickly or easily. It requires structural changes to the Japanese economy and immigration system.
The Bottom Line: Outlook for Japan
Japan is facing both cyclical and structural challenges as it begins the new year. Its cyclical challenges are global supply chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which continue to put downward pressure on its economy as it strives to recover from the global recession.

Structural challenges are associated with the three-decades-long economic slowdown associated with the burst of multiple asset bubbles in 1990 and a decline in the birthrate, which create labor shortages and an unfavorable dependency ratio.


GDP Grows by Fits and Starts in 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to convulse Japan’s economy in 2021. Real GDP grew by fits and starts, decreasing an annualized 2.9% against the previous quarter in January–March 2021, after which it increased 2.0% in April–June and decreased 3.6% in July–September. The industrial production index fell 3.7% against the prior quarter in July–September 2021, declining for the first time in five quarters due to semiconductor shortages and to shortages in the supply of parts ensuing from the spread of the pandemic in Asia.

Both real GDP and the industrial production index are expected to recover in October–December 2021, supported by the diminished growth of new COVID-19 cases in Japan, the lifting of the emergency declaration in September, and the gradual improvement of parts shortages. These trends are likely to continue in 2022.

In the Japan Center for Economic Research’s December 2021 ESP Forecast (released on December 15), which averages the predictions of some 40 private-sector economists, real GDP is forecast to grow an annualized 6.39% against the prior quarter in October–December 2021 and to grow 2.72% for the whole of fiscal 2021.

In fiscal 2022, real GDP is predicted to increase an average of 3.03%. After slumping 4.5% in fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, real GDP is anticipated to grow for two straight years to fiscal 2022.

COVID-19 Concerns Wane
The Japan Center for Economic Research also releases a number of special ESP Forecasts. In odd months since September 2020, JCER has asked economists to select and rank three risks for Japan’s economy. The risk ranking first up to the September 2021 forecast was the COVID-19 infection situation. However, reflecting the sharp decline of new cases, the infections fell to second place in the November forecast, with the worsening of the Chinese economy replacing it in first place.

Another special forecast that JCER publishes every three months concerns the purchasing managers’ index for China. This PMI showed improvement going forward in the November forecast, with the consensus forecast indicating the index exceeding 50—the number indicating a majority of respondents taking a positive view—in the spring of 2022 and beyond.

The risk factor ranking third was rising crude oil prices, replacing the worsening of the US economy in that place. The increase of crude oil and other resource prices and the increase of transportation costs are factors of immediate concern. However, the benchmark West Texas Intermediate will average $70.77 per barrel in 2022 (according to the December forecast), and it is reasonable to assume that crude oil prices will settle down by mid-2022.

The Omicron Variant Revives Uncertainties
With the rapid decline of new COVID-19 cases since September, people are beginning to feel more hopeful in Japan. On November 26, however, the World Health Organization designated a new COVID-19 variant of concern, discovered in South Africa, and named it Omicron. It is reported that this variant is more transmissible than Delta and that existing vaccines may be less effective against it.

On December 7, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, stated that while it is still too early to draw conclusions, Omicron does seem to cause a less severe illness. This statement helped to ease anxieties about the Omicron variant. With the Japanese government tightening border restrictions, there is little worry about the spread of Omicron in Japan as of the time of writing. It cannot be denied, however, that concerns have increased about the possible return of supply restrictions depending on how the new variant spreads globally.

The term “novel coronavirus” made its first appearance in the January 2020 Economy Watchers Survey of the Cabinet Office. While the number of COVID-19 cases has been a significant adverse factor for the economy since then, it has more recently become a positive factor due to its relatively low level.

I have developed a COVID-19 current DI by selecting only respondent replies with comments on the pandemic in the November 2021 Economy Watchers Survey (in this diffusion index, responses of favorable, somewhat favorable, unchanged, somewhat unfavorable, and unfavorable are assigned values between 1 and 0 in increments of 0.25, which are then weighted by the number of responses). The resulting DI came to 63.3, the highest figure since January 2020. Moreover, the COVID-19 future DI was 61.4 in October, also a record high, after which it declined to 56.5 in November. Since the November survey covers the period from November 25 to 30, it is apparent that the future DI is reflecting concerns about the Omicron variant. Respondents commenting on the new variant totaled 168 in the future DI, less than 10% of the total, and the related DI was 46.5, falling below the 50 that divides favorable from unfavorable sentiment.

The BOJ Tankan Points to a Gradual Recovery
In the Bank of Japan’s December Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises), the adverse impact of high raw material costs resulted in large manufacturers’ assessment of business conditions being largely unchanged at +18. This, however, is still an improvement of 4 points over the future outlook reported in September. The business conditions DI of large manufacturers is expected to worsen to +13 going forward. While large manufacturers reporting unfavorable conditions have decreased, those reporting somewhat unfavorable conditions have risen sharply, a likely reflection of uncertainties related to the Omicron variant.

Meanwhile, the business conditions DI of large nonmanufacturers increased 7 points to +9, a record high since the +20 recorded in December 2019 before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. The business conditions DI for all enterprises and industries rose to +2 from –2 in the previous survey. These DIs disclose expectations that a gradual economic recovery will continue.

The Business Cycle Forecast by Vogue Words
On November 19 the cabinet approved new economic measures totaling an unprecedented ¥55.7 trillion on a fiscal expenditure basis and ¥78.9 trillion on a project expenditure basis, which includes related financial institution loans and private-sector investments. These fiscal policies should have a positive effect and are anticipated to boost GDP 1.79% in the average forecast of the ESP Forecast and 3.15% in the average of the eight highest forecasts.

The weakening influence of COVID-19 is appearing in year-end events for 2021. In Japan’s word-of-the-year contest for 2020, half of the 30 words nominated were related to COVID-19. The top prize went to san mitsu, a phrase commonly rendered in English as the three Cs, or closed spaces, crowded places, and close-contact settings that are to be avoided. In 2021, only 20% of the 30 words nominated concerned COVID-19. The top prize went to baseball-related terms referring to Japan’s Ohtani Shōhei, a rare combination of pitcher and slugger playing for the Los Angeles Angels, who was named the American League’s Most Valuable Player.

The kanji of the year selected by a nationwide vote was the mitsu ideograph in san mitsu in 2020 and kin (gold) for the fourth time in 2021. The kanji of the year tends to reflect the business cycle or economic conditions experienced that year.

In recognition of the gold medals awarded athletes, kin is frequently selected as the kanji of the year in years when the Olympics take place, as long as there are no shocking developments like the 2008 financial crisis. Kin being chosen in 2021 suggests that the economic expansion that began in May 2020 is continuing.

Limited Prospects for Contraction
The economic expansion that began in May 2020 is expected to continue in 2022. Influenced by the production index and other trends, the government’s Index of Business Conditions that had indicated “improvement” was revised to “weakening” in September. A return to “improvement” will not occur before March 8 at the earliest, when the January index is released. There are, however, only limited prospects of the assessment of “weakening” being followed by a contraction phase. The composite index, which indicates the magnitude of economic fluctuations, turned upward after four months in October, and this index is anticipated to rise further in November and subsequent months.

The December ESP Forecast includes a composite diffusion index on business conditions expressing the consensus view of economic forecasters. This index is 88.9 for October–December 2021, far above the dividing line of 50 between an expanding and contracting economy. The composite DI then trends in the 90s in the first half of 2022 and in the 90s and 80s in the second half of the year, again far above 50.


Introduction↑
Social protest surged in Japan during the final years of the First World War and in its immediate aftermath, including labor strikes, union organizing, and riots. These actions drew on older traditions of protest and older concepts of moral economy. They were also shaped by new ideas and practices – results of Japanese engagement with global trends since the late 19th century. In this context, the war and its conclusion had significant impact, both direct and indirect, on social protest and the responses to it. Intellectuals debated the character and meaning of these upheavals, and their relation to democracy and to the political order, while many politicians and elite bureaucrats shifted to a more accommodative approach to social and political challenges.

Emerging Traditions and Practices of Protest, and State Responses↑
In Japan as elsewhere, rich traditions of social protest pre-dated the advent of industrial capitalism. The most important actions in early modern Japan (the Tokugawa period, 1600–1868) were peasant protests, ranging from petitions and peaceful appeals, to violent actions such as the smashing of a rice merchant’s home and the distribution of his rice at a “fair price” set by the rioters.[1] The nationwide “rice riots” of 1919 drew on these traditions, but were also informed by new developments of the modern era.

Industrial workers, whose protests soared in numbers in the last years of World War I, had also been building a modest new tradition of strikes and union organizing for some decades. By the eve of the war, heavy industrial laborers in shipyards, arsenals, steel works, and mines had learned to coordinate activities and carry out disputes effectively. They drew upon ideas and tactics with recognizably pre-modern antecedents. In the actions of workers at the Uraga Dock Company around the time of the Russo-Japanese War (1905), according to a newspaper reporter, a “time honored sense of obligation (giri)” drew workers together in their occasional protests.[2] The term giri represented a critical social value with roots in the past. Tactics included petitioning and the selection of representatives, and the use of a petition signed by all those in a workshop called to mind the custom of the village petition, often a prelude to a peasant protest in Tokugawa times.

New elements included leadership or support by men who in some cases had studied organizing strategies in Europe or the United States, and in some cases, such as that of Katayama Sen (1859–1933) and Takano Fusatarō (1869–1904) had spent time abroad. The first sustained union organizing emerged just before the Great War, led by Suzuki Bunji (1885–1946), a university graduate and Christian social reformer. He modeled his organization on British institutions of worker self-help called Friendly Societies. Named the Yūaikai (literally, Friendship Association), Suzuki’s organization grew from a group of thirteen men meeting in a Tokyo church basement in late 1912 to a union of 20,000 by 1917 with branches in factories and mines nationwide. From 1913 women were accepted as “auxiliary” members. They were offered full membership 1917, when they numbered 1,500. Through 1917 the group disavowed striking as a tactic, promoted self-help and self-improvement, and peacefully sought the cooperation of owners and managers to improve working conditions.

Impacts of the War, Direct and Indirect↑
In contrast to the utter disaster it brought to Europe, World War I offered opportunities to Japan. It cut European traders off from Asian customers, giving a huge boost to Japan’s newly industrializing economy. Between 1914 and 1918, Japan’s industrial output rose from 1.4 billion to 6.8 billion yen. Exports surged; overseas sales of Japanese cotton cloth rose 185 percent during these years. Industrial employment ballooned from 850,000 to 1.5 million. Major corporations recorded their highest profits ever. With laborers in scarce supply, wages rose sharply. Unfortunately for workers and consumers, prices rose even faster. Japan experienced its worst inflationary surge in modern times. Between 1914 and 1920, the retail price of rice increased 174 percent, while wholesale prices overall rose almost 150 percent. The economic ground for social protest was fertile.

Japan’s political ground shifted as well during and immediately after the war, toward greater support for, and expectation of, more democratic politics. Just before the war, a Movement for Constitutional Government, promoted by members of the Diet in the Seiyūkai party, led by Hara Takashi (1856–1921), had forced the ruling oligarchs to concede cabinet positions and a measure of policy control to elected politicians. Their movement drew momentum from numerous public rallies as well as a street politics of demonstrations and some riots.[3] During the war, elected politicians, most prominently Katō Takaaki (1860–1926) of the Kenseikai (Constitutional Association), took steps – most notably the infamous “Twenty-one demands” presented to China’s government in January 1915 – both to expand the reach of Japan’s empire and win a greater voice for the Diet in both foreign and domestic policy.[4]

Both during the war, and with greatest force immediately after, liberal-minded intellectuals argued that a democratic awakening was underway globally and in Japan. The most prominent was Yoshino Sakuzō (1878–1933). His famous 1916 essay, “On the Meaning of Constitutional Government and the Methods by Which It Can Be Perfected” made the strong claim that “the trend toward constitutional government is worldwide and can no longer be resisted.”[5] The tortured logic by which Yoshino sought to reconcile the absolute sovereignty granted the emperor by Japan’s 1889 constitution with a political system “rooted in the people” offers good evidence that some resisted this trend. The end of the war in a victory for the democratic nations certainly bolstered the position that what some commentators called a “mass awakening” was underway.[6]

Further to the political left, the Russian Revolution of 1917 had the most profound impact on those seeking not only a political system that served ordinary people, but one where actions by the people would be the engine for change. Socialist ideas had already entered Japan early in the 20th century, winning modest but much-noticed support among young men and women. Some radically minded young men had joined the Yūaikai while still students in 1914 and risen to leadership posts by 1917. They saw the Russian Revolution as an epochal global event, and it gave them impetus to transform the moderate “Friendly Society” into a militant union. One of them, Nosaka Sanzō (1892–1993), ran a contest in the Yūaikai monthly magazine to identify the best worker essay responding to the revolution. The winning essay, actually written under a pen name by Hirasawa Keishichi (1889–1923), “likened it to a great light in the world.” Nosaka gave second prize to an essay he wrote himself, in the voice of a factory worker, and published under a pen name.[7] In December of 1918, inspired both by the Russian Revolution and, like their liberal teachers, by the end of the war in a “victory of democracy,” many of these youths came together to found the New Man Society (Shinjin-kai). This group formed the vanguard of a Marxist-inspired student movement, which flourished through the late 1920s and remained a significant underground force into the 1930s.[8]

Labor Movement and Labor Strikes↑
Japan’s labor movement changed dramatically from 1917 through 1919 in the realms of ideas and actions. Until this time, despite pressure from increasingly radical young activists such as Nosaka, the Yūaikai leaders disavowed strikes. They called for respect as members of the nation, or kokumin, rather than a separate class of workers. In a play written by Hirasawa Keishichi, a sympathetically portrayed worker made this point when he refused to join what he saw as an ill-advised strike:

The Japanese blood is not fit for shouts of socialism.... The time has come for the Japanese people to take back their souls as Japanese. The enemy of Japan’s worker is not the government or the capitalist. Japanese workers should not act as workers. We should act as humans and people of the nation (kokumin).[9]
In 1917, however, predating the November 1917 revolution in Russia, actions at hundreds of productions sites nationwide revealed that thousands of working men and women were no longer inclined to politely appeal for improved conditions. Before this year, no more than fifty strikes were reported in any given year, involving no more than 10,000 participants in total. That count leaped to 398 strikes with 57,000 participants in 1917, 417 strikes and 66,000 strikers in 1918, and 497 actions involving 63,000 men and women in 1919. Most of these actions took place in the machine industry, shipbuilding, and mines, where the workforce was mostly male. But a surge in protests also took place at textile mills, where most operatives were young women living in tightly monitored dormitories, expecting and expected to work only a few years. Before 1917, no more than fourteen strikes took place in spinning mills and weaving sheds, involving at most 2,000 workers each year. From 1917 to 1919, textile factories witnessed more than fifty strikes each year, with a peak of 30,000 participants in 1918. In a clear response to the surge in wartime prices, 80 percent of strikes – and more than four-fifths of strikers – demanded wage increases. Smaller numbers of actions, about 5 percent each year, sought shorter working hours, opposed pay cuts, or sought redress from unfair supervisors. About two-thirds of the strikes either won all their demands or ended in compromise (most often a wage increase short of the full demand). This was a sharp turnaround from previous years, when fewer than half of strikes ended in full or partial gains.[10]

This surge of protest came from the bottom up. It pulled the organized labor movement toward greater militancy and a more critical view of capitalism. Unions led few of these actions. No data exists on this point until 1922, when unions organized one in four labor strikes, and it is certain the proportion was lower in earlier years. But the Yūaikai leader, Suzuki Bunji, was occasionally asked by a “strike group” to mediate a dispute. Through such experiences, and at the instigation of more radical younger leaders, the Yūaikai shed its skin as a moderate “Friendly Society.” It began supporting the assertive labor unions already being organized in workplaces and federated by industry. In fall of 1919, the organization adopted a new name, the Friendly Society Greater Japan Federation of Labor (Dai Nihon Rōdō Sōdōmei Yūaikai), in 1921 abbreviated to simply Japan Federation of Labor.

Rice Riots↑
The strike wave of 1917–19 was a sign of major social change, to be sure.[11] But the most momentous social upheaval of this era, one which also inspired the labor movement toward greater militancy, were the protests that have come to be called the Rice Riots. They took place in the summer and fall of 1918, beginning in late July 1918 in a small fishing village in Toyama prefecture with a protest led by wives in the fishing families. Protests spread rapidly to major cities, farming villages, and mining towns. By the end of September 1918, “riots” had taken place in forty-two of forty-seven prefectures. Rallies protesting rice prices in major cities drew as many as 50,000 attendees and sometimes ended in riot. No comprehensive and precise count of events and participants is possible, but at a minimum protests took place in forty-nine cities, 217 towns, and 231 villages, with upwards of 700,000 participants, and more likely over one million.

The actions of so-called rioters varied. They did not all fit a common-sense definition of riot. They included peaceful marches on government offices and boycotts of grain shipment, as well as more classic tactics of grain riots also found in many other times and places: attacks on rice wholesalers or retail sellers, destruction of rice stores, and the forced sales of rice at a “fair” price determined by the crowd.[12] It makes sense to characterize all these events with the single capitalized expression Rice Riots insofar as they took place over a limited time, with the price of rice the major issue. But, in addition to noting the variety of tactics, and the fact that not all incidents turned violent, one must divide these events into five distinct categories based on location and context.

The first were the riots along the Toyama coast in late July and early August 1918, which set off a wave of actions elsewhere. These were notable for the role of women, who led twenty-three of thirty protests recorded in Toyama, at a time when modern capitalism had begun to transform a traditional industry and shake up gender roles. Far more than in the past, wealthy fishing bosses employed hired male laborers on fleets ranging far from their home harbors. The wives not only managed the household economy in the absence of their husbands; they often worked as stevedores loading bales of locally produced rice onto boats for shipment elsewhere. These women were outraged not simply at the escalating cost of rice, which far outran their own wages combined with those of their seasonally employed husbands. They attributed the rice price increase to an artificial scarcity caused by the export of the grain. Their tactics were a mix of old and new, reflecting this changing economic structure. They petitioned local officials and merchants to sell rice at a discount, a time-honored tactic of protests in Toyama (and elsewhere) in the 19th century and before. They also boycotted the shipment of rice by refusing to load it. This led to some tumultuous conflicts with local police, and the temporary jailing of protestors. It also won them relief in the form of discounted sale of rice.[13]

In early August 1918, just as the Toyama protests were subsiding, due to both relief and police suppression, a series of rallies, sometimes followed by riots, took place in major cities. The first urban rice riot came in Nagoya, not that far from Toyama, beginning on 9 August 1918 and lasting several days. In short order citizens of Osaka, Kobe, Hiroshima, and then Tokyo raised voices of protest at the unreasonable rice prices and a political system that failed to serve the people. The protesters echoed older traditions with calls for relief from high prices, and in confrontations with rice merchants where they enforced the immediate sale of rice at “fair” prices. In some cases, they looted or destroyed rice stores. At the same time, speakers at rallies attended by many thousands of city-dwellers asserted modern political rights explicitly, in a spirit of what can be called “imperial democracy.” Judging from the records of those arrested, attendees were mainly from the most impoverished population of temporary migrants, day laborers, or the unemployed. Most numerous were factory laborers, and those engaged in traditional crafts and trades as artisans or retail sellers. These urbanites heard speeches attacking the cabinet for its inadequate economic policies, the police for violating the right to assemble and protest, and the nouveau rich (narikin) capitalists for exploiting the people. Echoing Hirasawa Keishichi’s speeches and play of the previous year, one speaker in Nagoya proclaimed:

Has not the national prestige of Imperial Japan been promoted abroad in wars against China and Russia? ... We are people of the nation (kokumin) in whose veins runs the blood of the Meiji emperor. But today, because of the soaring price of rice, we find it hard to live. This situation is due to the worthlessness of the present cabinet’s rice regulation policy.[14]
Protests and riots subsided, as in Toyama, due to a combination of the arrest of thousands of alleged leaders, and the emergency import of rice to the cities, with sales at discounted prices managed by municipal governments.

From mid-August through September 1918, the most numerous protests took place in farming villages throughout most of Japan (few took place in the northeast). As with the first protests in Toyama, these incidents mixed calls on landlords and officials to respect a customary moral economy with demands reflecting the penetration of a national and global market economy to the countryside. Tenant farmers on the one hand demanded that retail rice merchants lower their prices and called on officials to provide relief through discounted sales. On the other hand, they called for rent reductions. This demand reflected anger that high rents, collected in kind through sharecropping arrangements, denied tenant famers the opportunity to take advantage of inflation by selling their produce on the market.[15]

The final domestic configuration of a “rice riot” were the coalmine protests. The majority were actions in the mines of southwestern Honshu and the southernmost island of Kyushu, with a few protests in the Jōban coalfields of Fukushima prefecture. Rising rice prices sparked these disputes, but they built on the energy of the strike wave of the previous year and on an emerging protest tradition reaching back to the 1880s and 1890s, when the zaibatsu (financial combines), led by Mitsubishi and Mitsui, vastly expanded this industry both for domestic consumption and for export. In this wider context, demands went beyond calls for wage increases at a time of price inflation to address longstanding discontent at dangerous and harsh working conditions and abuse of miners by their managers and labor bosses.[16]

The rice riots in Japan’s colonies constitute a fifth and very important category of protest, relatively neglected in Japanese scholarship and entirely overlooked in the Anglophone literature. These protests took three main forms. First, in Korea in particular, rising rice prices – sparked in part by the sourcing of Korean rice to supply Japanese troops engaged in the Siberia Expedition – were a major cause of a spike in labor strikes by Korean workers. The number of strikes rose from eight in 1917 to fifty in 1918, with the largest a strike by the streetcar drivers in colonial Keijō (today, Seoul) in August 1918 successfully demanding higher wages. A second set of actions in Korea were demands for sale of discounted rice, and in some cases attacks on rice merchants and enforcing of “fair price” sales. These took place as the colonial government was beginning a program to deliver rice to Keijō and sell it at a discount. The most violent protest took place when the supply of relief rice ran out at one distribution center located at a Keijō elementary school. A crowd of about 1,000 Koreans destroyed the school building. The third form of protest, found in Shanghai, Taiwan, and Keijō, consisted of demands that the Japanese cease the inflation-causing export of locally produced rice back to the home islands. In some particular cases, these demands were successful. But they could not, in the end, prevent the import of huge amounts of rice to Japan from Korea, Taiwan, China, and Vietnam, to increase the overall supply and allow discounted sales of so-called “foreign rice” (gaimai). The historian Imoto Mitsuo and his colleagues logically argued that these actions fed into the far more widespread anti-Japanese demonstrations of March 1919 in Korea – the famous 1 March 1919 movement of peaceful protests, violently suppressed by colonial authorities – as well as China’s 4 May 1919 movement opposing Japanese imperialism.[17] More research would be valuable to trace this lineage of protest.

Running through all of these riots is a powerful combination of historically rooted appeals to honor a traditional moral economy with demands framed by the constitution of a modern empire, calling for reform of the new capitalist system. In an important recent paper, Tomie Naoko showed that intellectuals at the time made the case in the print media that the riots were “a de facto quest for citizenship” under the Meiji constitutional order.[18] Calls for the sale of rice at fair prices sought to restore a moral economy that had eroded in the modern era. Demands for respect as citizens or fair treatment as workers sought to realize the promise of modern rights.

Responses of State and Capital↑
As noted in passing above, the response of the state to the rice riots was what Japanese idiom calls the “candy and whip” (ame to muchi) approach. The “candy” included large imperial and corporate donations to enable distribution of relief rice, as well as sale of rice at a discount to those judged needy by local officials. The “whip” ranged from state bans on public meetings and censorship of press reports of the riots, to the mobilization of military police and infantry sent to major cities and mines. Police or troops killed more than thirty protestors around the country. They detained over 20,000 people and charged more than 8,000 with rioting or related offenses. Some of those arrested were brutally interrogated. In speedily concluded trials, most got off with fines, but thirty rioters received sentences of life imprisonment at hard labor. The Justice Ministry focused most attention on rooting out ideologically motivated rioters. By mid-September 1918, calm had returned to almost all the sites of protest or riot.[19]

While the period of rioting was brief, the impact of the social protests of the final years of World War I was long-lasting. Prime Minister Terauchi Masatake (1852–1919) resigned on 29 September 1918, replaced by Hara Takashi heading Japan’s first political party cabinet. Hara, among the most cautious and equivocal of the party leaders, had joined the ruling alliance. The sole survivor among the oligarchs who built the Meiji political order from above was Yamagata Aritomo (1838–1922). A man not given to displays of emotion or fear, even Yamagata was “terribly upset” by the Rice Riots, according to a visitor in August 1918. He had no choice but to turn reluctantly to the once upstart politician, Hara, as the only man who could control the masses.[20]

Policies of accommodation would continue, such as the founding of the Harmonization Society (Kyōchōkai) in 1919, jointly funded by the state and major corporations, and the Ōhara Institute for Social Research, founded by an industrialist concerned to address labor and other social issues. A Social Bureau was created in the Home Ministry in 1920, the first state agency with the explicit mission to resolve these newly prominent social “questions” (mondai) – the labor, farmer, and women “questions” most prominently. But labor unions and labor strikes continued apace, as did the founding of tenant unions and tenant protests, and demands for universal suffrage for men and for women. The first May Day celebration in Japan took place in 1920, and an underground Communist Party was founded in 1922.

The government continued its double-edged response throughout the decade. On the one hand, harsh crackdowns on the left continued, particularly targeting those suspected of membership in the Japan Communist Party. On the other hand, the government granted universal manhood suffrage in 1925, and passed a Labor Dispute Arbitration Act and a Peasant Arbitration Act in 1926. In 1931 the Diet’s House of Representatives approved bills that would have granted legal protection to labor unions and tenant farmer unions. Neither bill became law, as the more conservative House of Peers rejected them. But all these steps together gave a new legitimacy to acts of collective protest. In the aftermath of the social turmoil of World War I, a set of social “questions” – labor, farmer, and women most prominently – had emerged to new and enduring prominence.

