South Korea’s history of economic success is sustained by its ability to adapt to the accelerating pace of global change. It is the fourth biggest economy in Asia and the 10th largest by nominal Gross domestic product (GDP). Its massive transformation after the end of the Korean War in 1953 turned the country into an industrial powerhouse and opened its gates to foreign economies. 

Its export-oriented policies and investment in innovation played a crucial role in developing the economy into what it is now. Textiles and light manufacturing were the first industries targeted for economic development before shifting to heavy industries such as iron and steel and chemicals manufacturing. 

Later on, South Korea refocused its efforts toward high-technology industries, such as automobile and electronics production, as well as information technology. The government’s economic strategy allowed real GDP growth to average 7.3% annually between 1960 and 2019.

In 2020, South Korea’s GDP growth was at -1% – the worst performance since 1998, due to the coronavirus pandemic-related collapse.

However, the South Korean economy rebounced in 2021, registering a GDP growth rate of 4.0%, its quickest rate in 11 years, powered by robust semiconductor and auto exports.

For 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicts a growth of 3.0% and for the following year 2.9%.


South Korea GDP Annual Growth Rate (in %)

 

However, the IMF warned that the country needs to be vigilant of its government spending to prevent a future debt explosion with its population rapidly aging.

Korean household debt is among the highest in the OECD at over 190% of net household disposable income, a significant portion of which is secured by real estate. Lending has grown quickly across all sectors since the pandemic outbreak, pushing credit as a percent of GDP further above its trend value.

The IMF expects South Korea’s debt-to-GDP ratio to increase to 55.0% in 2022 and reach 66.7% by 2026. The expected growth pace is also the highest among 35 advanced economies. The average ratio of the 35 countries is forecast to decrease to 118.6% from 121.6%, during the same period.

Currency and Central Bank
The South Korean won is the country’s official currency and is issued by the central bank, the Bank of Korea (BOK). Over the past decade, the value of the won has been stable, with $1 equivalent to 1,117 won in February 2011 and as of February 2021, $1 is equivalent to 1,098 won. 

The central bank was established on June 12, 1950, in Seoul and is currently led by BOK Governor Lee Ju-yeol. The BOK’s Monetary Policy Committee is tasked with the formulation of monetary and credit policies in the country. 

In January 2022, South Korea’s consumer inflation jumped 3.6%, remaining above the central bank’s 2% target for a 10th straight month.

Seeking to restrain inflation and household debt growth, the Bank of Korea hiked its benchmark interest rate from 1.0% to 1.25% in January 2022. The BOK hinted that it could raise interest rates again to more than 1.75% this year, after its three back-to-back hikes since August 2021.


South Korean economy: Inflation (in %)

Industry and Trade
South Korea has transformed from an agricultural country to a highly industrialized one over the past 60 years and is now recognized as the largest semiconductor producer in the world. To foster growth, the country emphasized technology development and innovation. 

The service sector has become the largest and fastest economic sector in South Korea, comprising 59% of the country’s GDP while employing 70% of the active population. The leading industries in this sector are department stores, store chains and supermarkets. One of the fastest-growing industries is tourism but it was impacted by the global pandemic. 

The manufacturing sector comes next, accounting for 38% of the GDP and providing jobs to 25% of the workforce. The main industries in this sector are textile, steel, automobile manufacturing, shipbuilding and electronics. 

Meanwhile, the agricultural sector has lagged behind, only contributing 2% of the nation’s GDP while employing around 4% of the active population. The main agricultural products in South Korea are barley, wheat, corn, soybeans and sorghum. Large-scale livestock farming also plays a big part in this sector. 

In 2020, trade represented about 70% of South Korea’s GDP. The country is currently the seventh biggest exporter in the world. Its main export products are integrated circuits, automobiles, refined petroleum, vehicle parts, and passenger and cargo ships. The nation’s main export partners are China, the US, Vietnam, Hong Kong, and Japan. 


South Korea Balance of Trade

 

In terms of total imports, South Korea ranks ninth globally. Its top import products are crude petroleum, integrated circuits, petroleum gas, refined petroleum, and coal briquettes. The country’s top import partners are China, the US, Japan, Vietnam, and Saudi Arabia.  

Survey and Rankings
South Korea received a score of 84.0 in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business 2020 report, securing 5th place out of 190 countries, behind Denmark, Hong Kong, Singapore, and New Zealand. 

While the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) rankings have been paused, the South Korean economy ranked first in its ICT adoption list of the 2020 special edition of the Global Competitiveness Report. 

Additionally, the South Korean economy ranked 24th with a score of 74.0 in the Heritage Foundation’s 2021 Index of Economic Freedom, maintaining its spot in the “mostly free” category. 

Stock Exchanges and Capital Markets
The Busan-based Korea Exchange (KRX) remains the only securities exchange operator in the country after the Korea Stock & Futures Exchange Act integrated the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE), Korea Futures Exchange, and KOSDAQ Stock Market. 

KRX is the 13th largest stock exchange in the world, with a market capitalisation of $2.42 tn. The Korea Composite Stock Price Index (KOSPI), which is the representative stock market index of South Korea, is calculated based on market capitalization.

Foreign investors may bet on the South Korean economy through exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that offer immediate diversification. These ETFs mostly focus on large to mid-sized companies.  

Bond Market
The South Korean bond market is one of the largest in Asia. Over the past years, it has undergone several reforms and development geared toward slow but steady market liberalisation. Foreign investors are welcome to purchase all types of fixed-income instruments. Korean bonds are either government or corporate bonds. 

The government issues 3-year, 5-year, and 10-year bonds on a regular basis, and in the form of treasury bonds, National Housing Bonds, and Seoul Metropolitan Subway Bonds. 

The BOK introduced in June 2021 a three-year maturity monetary stabilization bond (MSB) while reducing two-year MSBs to increase responsiveness in liquidity adjustment. This was after MSB yields declined despite overall increases among longer-dated treasury bond yields. 

To curb rising interest rates, the central bank of Korea said in November 2021 that it would buy back treasury bonds ($1.7 bn worth of government bonds), if necessary. Meanwhile, the BOK also plans to reduce the sale of monetary stabilization bonds, to improve investors’ sentiment and ease volatility in the market.

Real Estate Market
Prices of real properties in South Korea have continued to increase despite new government policies aimed at stabilizing the housing market in the country. 

This price surge has attracted foreign investors and local multi-homeowners to buy houses as an investment. With owning a house traditionally perceived as a sign of stability, surveys show that 83% of South Koreans want to have their own houses.  

The most common type of housing in the country are apartments, which are often high-rise residential buildings ranging between five- to 20-storeys high. These apartments are the most preferred housing type among locals as they are built around facilities like shopping centers, sports complexes, and childcare centers. 


South Korea Housing Index (in %)

 

However, in December 2021, the number of residential property sales in South Korea fell by 62% year on year to 53,774 – the lowest level for the month since 2008.

South Korean banks’ household loans also declined in December, marking the first month-on-month decline for any December since 2004. This is on back of the tight lending rules and the three rate hikes by the central bank.(1)

South Korea is a country at East Asia which located at the southern portion of Korean peninsula. Being the 4th largest economy in Asia and 11th largest in the world, it is an industrialized and developed country (Hahn, Im, Lew, Lee and Yu, 2019). However, there is still some risks that the country will be facing. Thus, in this report, we are going to analyse the country risk of South Korea.

Being bordered by North Korea, South Korea is a single nation formed in 1948, located at the southern part of Korean Peninsula. The condition of the country can actually be studied from the economic, political and social perspective.

Firstly, the economic environment of South Korea for the past 10 years can be shown from the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country.

The GDP of South Korea has been growing steadily from 2008 to 2017. However, there is slight drop in GDP to $ 901.93 billion in year 2009 due to weak exports resulting from sagging global demand. Later in 2017, the GDP of the country then reached a peak of $1530.75 billion, representing 2.47% of the world economy (Trading Economics, 2019).

The Economy in South Korea
In 2008, the South Korea’s economy was affected due to the subprime crisis in US. The economy of the country grew by only 2.2% which is less than half of its average growth (Park, 2010). But, they managed to recover their economy with the surplus trade in current account at the end of 2013 which is derived from the export of technology products. Moreover, South Korea has also adapted the strategy of export-oriented economic to drive the country’s economy. In 2014, it became the seventh greatest importer and exporter in the world (“Economy and Business Opportunities from South Korea”, 2019). Besides, the government of South Korea has increased their spending in 2015 in order to support the economic growth (Carlens, 2016).

In year 2017, the economy of South Korea is growing at fastest pace owing to the increased in export of technology products and increasing consumer spending (“South Korean economy grows 3.1% in 2017”, 2018)
Secondly, the political environment of South Korea can be represented by the political stability index of the country.

Political Stability in South Korea
The political stability index of South Korea was the lowest in 2014 which is only 0.11 is due to the internal conflict between South Korea and North Korea in which both countries are involved in exchange fire across the border. This is because South Korea activists had condemned Kim Jong-un, the North Korea’s leader by launching balloons containing leaflets. In addition, when the Northern patrol ship crossed over the maritime border, gun fire was then exchanged between the both countries at the same year (“South Korea Timeline”, 2018). Later, the rising index is due to the fact that the North Korea and South Korea had lately reached a peace treaty (“Best’s Country Risk Report”, 2018).

Thirdly, the social stability or safety of South Korea can be represented by the crime rate of the country. Violence and theft have made up most of the cases in the whole criminal cases per 100,000 population. Meanwhile the criminal rate in South Korea is showing a constant trend from 2008 to 2015 and a slight drop in 2016 and 2017. The slight drop in criminal rate in South Korea in 2016 and 2017 is probably because of the application of new Criminal Justice System in 2014 by the Supreme Public Prosecutors’ Office. Moreover, there is also the enforcement of “Special Act on the Prevention of Insurance Fraud” in September 2016 (Kindicator, 2019). In overall, the crime rate in South Korea can be considered one of the lowest in the world (OSAC, 2018). This may reflect the social stability of South Korea.

Conclusion
As a whole, throughout the years, South Korea has been transforming into an extremely urbanized country. The political and social stability of the country is very important to drive the economy growth of the country as it can mitigate the country risk and attract more foreign investment.(2)

In 2018, the overall foodservice sales value in South Korea amounted to around 87.8 billion U.S. dollars. Based on sales value, restaurants were the biggest subsector that year. A survey in April 2019 found that more than 36 percent of respondents stated that they were eating out once every two to three days.
Chain franchise vs. independent operators
In 2017, McDonald’s was the leading company in South Korea’s foodservice sector based on value sales. Nevertheless, customers seem to prefer dining out at independent restaurants; while the value per transaction at independent operators were lower, the total sales of independent operators were higher in most subsectors. While sales of chain franchises are expected to grow faster than those of independent operators, the South Korean foodservice market is still forecasted to be dominated by small-to-medium-sized, often family-owned businesses.
Food delivery
While dining out is a regular activity within families, friends, and co-workers, many South Koreans tend to order food delivery frequently. As of 2019, around half of surveyed South Koreans mainly used apps for food delivery, overshadowing ordering via websites or phone calls. The most downloaded and most used delivery app based on Android activity as of January 2020 was Baedal Minjok, also known as Baemin, owned by Woowa Brothers. In the end of 2020, Delivery Hero announced the acquisition of Woowa Brothers for around four billion U.S. dollars. Germany-based Delivery Hero is the company behind the second most popular food delivery application in South Korea called Yogiyo.(3)

The economy of South Korea is a highly developed mixed economy.[20][21][22] By nominal GDP, it has the 4th largest economy in Asia and the 10th largest in the world. South Korea is notable for its emergence of economic development from an underdeveloped nation to a developed, high-income country in a few generations. This economic growth has been described as the Miracle on the Han River,[23] which has allowed it to join OECD and the G-20. South Korea still remains one of the fastest growing developed countries in the world, following the Great Recession. It is included in the group of Next Eleven countries as having the potential to play a dominant role in the global economy by the middle of the 21st century.[24]

South Korea's education system and the establishment of a motivated and educated populace is largely responsible for spurring the country's high technology boom and economic development.[25] South Korea began to adapt an export-oriented economic strategy to fuel its economy. In 2019, South Korea was the eighth largest exporter and eighth largest importer in the world. The Bank of Korea and the Korea Development Institute periodically release major economic indicators and economic trends of the economy of South Korea.[26][27]

Renowned financial organizations, such as the International Monetary Fund, notes the resilience of the South Korean economy against various economic crises. They cite the country's economic advantages as reasons for this resilience, including low state debt, and high fiscal reserves that can quickly be mobilized to address any expected financial emergencies.[28] Other financial organizations, like the World Bank, describe Korea as one of the fastest-growing major economies of the next generation, along with BRIC and Indonesia.[29] South Korea was one of the few developed countries that was able to avoid a recession during the Great Recession.[30] Its economic growth rate reached 6.2% in 2010, a recovery from economic growth rates of 2.3% in 2008 and 0.2% in 2009, during the Great Recession. The South Korean economy again recovered with the record-surplus of US$70.7 billion mark of the current account in the end of 2013, up 47 percent growth from 2012. This growth contrasted with the uncertainties of the global economic turmoil, with the country's major economic output being the technology products exports.[31]

Despite the South Korean economy's high growth and structural stability, South Korea experiences damages to its credit rating in the stock market due to North Korea in times of military crises. The recurring conflict affects the financial markets of its economy.In 2012, 11.1 million foreign tourists visited South Korea, making it one of the most visited countries in the world,[78] up from 8.5 million in 2010.[79] Many tourists from all around Asia visit South Korea which has been due to the rise of Korean Wave (Hallyu).

Seoul is the principal tourist destination for visitors; popular tourist destinations outside of Seoul include Seorak-san national park, the historic city of Gyeongju and semi-tropical Jeju Island. In 2014 South Korea hosted the League of Legends season 4 championship and then, in 2018, the season 8 championship.Since 1991 there has been a steady upwards trend in South Korean M&A until 2018 with only a short break around 2004. Since 1991 around 18,300 deals in, into or out of South Korea have been announced, which sum up to a total value of over 941. bil. USD. The year 2016 has been the year with the largest deal value (1,818 in bil. USD) and the most deals (82,3).[82]

Target industries are distributed very evenly with no industry taking a larger share than 10%. The top three target industries are Electronics (9.7%), Semiconductors (9.1%) and Metals and Mining (7.7%). However, over 51% of the acquiring companies originate from the financial and brokerage sector.(4)

The Republic of Korea (South Korea) is an established democracy that largely respects civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights, although significant human rights concerns remain.

Discrimination against women is pervasive, as well as discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people, racial and ethnic minorities, and foreign migrants and refugees. The government also retains draconian criminal defamation laws and sweeping intelligence and national security laws that chill speech critical of the government and corporations.

In 2021, the South Korean government implemented public health measures to limit the spread of Covid-19, but some of its policy responses and implementation raised privacy rights concerns. While schools remained partially or fully open for much of the year, closures due to Covid-19 still affected over 10 million children.Women and Girls’ Rights
Discrimination against women and girls is widespread in South Korea. The gender pay gap, at 31 percent, is the widest among countries that belong to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). South Korea has been consistently ranked by The Economist as having the worst working environment for women among the 29 advanced economies it analyzes.

South Korea’s #MeToo movement gained some ground in the past two years, although it also faced backlash. In May, “men’s rights” groups targeted several South Korean retailers for using “pinching hand” signs in their ads, which the men claimed was similar to the logo of Megalia, a controversial online feminist community known for ridiculing men that was shut down in 2017. Following threats of boycotts, the GS25 convenience store chain apologized for hurting men’s feelings, disciplined employees, and took down an ad campaign. In June, Lee Jun-seok, a politician who advocates for “men’s rights” and claims that men in South Korea are targets of reverse discrimination, was elected leader of the main opposition conservative People Power Party.

The government continues to struggle to address rampant problems with online gender-based crimes, including widespread internet posting of sexual images of women and girls without their consent. In November 2020, Cho Joo-bin, one of the operators of an infamous network of chat rooms on the Telegram messaging app—where users were viewing, sharing, and trading non-consensual images of dozens of women and girls, including of acts of sexual violence obtained through coercion and blackmail—was sentenced to 40 years in prison in the so-called “Nth Room” case. On April 8, Moon Hyeong-wook, who opened the first chat rooms of the network in 2015, was sentenced to 34 years in prison for forcing 21 young women, including girls, into making sexually explicit videos and sharing them. The police identified approximately 1,100 women and girls who were victims of this network.

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The LGBT rights movement in South Korea is growing but continues to face hostility and severe discrimination, especially in the armed forces. In October, a South Korean court ruled that the military unlawfully discriminated against Byun Hee-su, the country’s first openly transgender soldier, when it discharged her after she underwent a gender affirming surgery in 2019. The court ordered her reinstatement, but Byun died by suicide in March. The Constitutional Court is also currently reviewing the 1962 Military Criminal Act, which punishes sexual acts between soldiers with up to two years in prison under a “disgraceful conduct” clause, regardless of consent.

In schools, LGBT children and young people experience severe isolation and mistreatment including bullying and harassment, a lack of confidential mental health support, exclusion from school curricula, and gender identity discrimination. 

Activists and progressive legislators have actively advocated for the National Assembly to develop and pass a broad-based national anti-discrimination law protecting LGBT persons as well as women, children, people with disabilities, older people, and foreigners. But the government did not make meaningful progress on such a law, citing a vocal Christian conservative group’s anti-LGBT opposition.

Freedom of Expression
Although South Korea has a relatively free press and lively civil society, the South Korean government continues to use draconian criminal defamation laws and sweeping intelligence and national security laws to restrict speech. Implementation of these laws creates a chilling effect that limits critical scrutiny of the government as well as corporations.

In December 2020, the South Korean government amended the National Intelligence Service Act using broad, vague language and authorizing the authorities to continue collecting information under the abusive and outdated National Security Law. The law criminalizes dissemination of anything that the government classifies as North Korean “propaganda,” as well as creating, joining, praising, or inducing others to join any political association considered an “anti-government organization,” a term not clearly defined in law.

In the same month, it adopted an amendment to the development of the Inter-Korean Relations Act, widely known as the anti-leaflet law, which imposes strict limitations on North Korean escapees and civil society organizations that work to send information and ideas from South Korea to the North Korean people. The law bans sending “leaflets, articles (including advertisements, printed matters, auxiliary storage devices, etc.), money or other financial benefits” through the country’s northern border and includes sentences of up to three years in prison or fines of up to 30 million won (US$25,000), which violate the principle of proportionality in punishments.

The special rapporteurs on freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, human rights defenders, and on the situation of human rights in North Korea, raised concerns regarding its vague wording, its possible disproportionate penalization of some forms of political expression and legitimate activities of some civil society members, and the effects it may have on access to information inside North Korea.

In September, the South Korean government backed down in the face of serious criticism and shelved amendments to a law tackling “false reporting” that prompted concerns about repression of media freedom. As the special rapporteur on the right of freedom of expression raised, the proposed amendments to the Press Arbitration Law would have imposed disproportionate sanctions for vaguely defined “false and manipulated” reporting. Criminal defamation laws already have a chilling effect on media reporting in South Korea, as they allow for up to seven years’ imprisonment and a fine, and truth is not a defense if the court finds what was said or written was not in the public interest.

Workers’ Rights
South Korea joined the International Labour Organization (ILO) in 1991 but has only ratified four of the ILO’s eight core conventions. On July 7, the cabinet approved the Labor Ministry’s motion for parliamentary ratification of three ILO conventions on freedom of association, the right to organize and collectively bargain, and the prohibition of forced labor.

On September 2, the South Korean government raided the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) headquarters and arrested its president, Yang Kyung-soo, for organizing rallies between May and July calling on the government to adopt policies and programs to address economic inequalities deepened by the pandemic. The government had banned the rallies, citing Covid-19 public health measures. Police accused Yang of breaking the Assembly and Demonstration Act and the Infectious Disease Control and Prevention Act, as well as disrupting traffic. The union claimed that a major rally on July 3 drew about 8,000 participants, but all wore masks and followed government guidelines for social distancing.

Policy on Human Rights in North Korea 
President Moon Jae-in’s administration weakened its criticism of North Korea’s human rights record. South Korea had previously co-sponsored annual resolutions at the United Nations condemning North Korea’s human rights abuses since 2008 but starting in 2019 it changed policy and declined to do so at both the UN Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.

South Korea has yet to fully implement the North Korean Human Rights Law that came into effect in September 2016 and failed to establish the North Korea Human Rights Foundation, designed to support research on North Korea’s rights situation and fund groups working on North Korean rights issues. The foundation is also supposed to help the government develop a strategy to promote human rights in the North. Since 2017, the government has left vacant the legislatively created position of ambassador at large on North Korean human rights.(5)
