April borrowing lower than last year24 May 2022
Public sector net borrowing was £18.6 billion in April 2022, £5.6 billion below April 2021, but £7.9 billion more than in April 2019, before the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. These figures exclude public sector banks.

Government spending was £76.0 billion in April 2022, £6.7 billion less than a year earlier. The additional £3.0 billion cost of the Council Tax Rebate was offset by reductions in other areas of expenditure, such as subsidies and transfers to local government.

Central government receipts were £70.2 billion in April 2022, £9.9 billion more than the same period the previous year. Last month’s tax receipts were £50.5 billion, £5.5 billion more than April last year.

Public sector debt was £2,347.7 billion at the end of April 2022, or around 95.7% of GDP. This is an increase of £179.1 billion, or 0.9 percentage points of GDP, since April 2021.

Retail sales volumes rose in April 2022 but have fallen over the longer term20 May 2022
Retail sales volumes (or the quantity bought) rose by 1.4% in April 2022, following a fall of 1.2% the previous month.

More broadly, sales volumes decreased by 0.3% in the three months to April 2022 compared with the previous three months, continuing a downward trend since spring 2021. Despite this, sales volumes in April 2022 were 4.1% higher than February 2020 (pre-coronavirus) levels.

The rise in retail sales volumes in April was driven by a 2.8% increase in food store sales, following falls in the previous five months. This was mostly because of increased purchases of alcohol and tobacco in supermarkets.

Retail sales in April 2022 were impacted most by sales in food stores Contribution to monthly growth, volume seasonally adjusted, Great Britain, April 2022 compared with March 2022
Source: Office for National Statistics – Monthly Business Survey – Retail Sales Inquiry

Non-store retailing sales volumes, which are predominantly sales from online-only retailers, rose by 3.7% in April 2022 led by stronger clothing sales.

Fuel sales rose by 1.4% in April following a fall of 4.2% the previous month, when record increases in petrol prices impacted sales.

Non-food stores sales volumes fell by 0.6%, with reduced sales in “other non-food stores” such as antiques stores and jewellery stores, and household goods stores such as furniture stores.
Annual growth of hourly earnings rose for job changers in April 202119 May 2022
In April 2021, average annual hourly earnings growth was 6.6 percentage points higher for employees who had changed jobs compared with those who stayed in their jobs.

However, those who have stayed at their job for longer than a year still consistently earned more than those who changed jobs. In April 2021, average hourly earnings were 17% higher for stayers, based on data from the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings.

Average annual hourly earnings growth was 6.6 percentage points higher for job changers who had not been furloughed at any point between April 2020 and April 2021, compared with those who had been furloughed.

Job changers who switched industries, occupations, or region as well as changed jobs experienced higher average annual earnings growth than those who moved jobs within their industry, occupation, or region.

Newly released data also show employees aged 16 to 24 years not only change jobs more often than those aged 25 to 49 years but also have higher average annual earnings growth when they do.

Younger people on average experience higher annual earnings growth when they change jobsMedian annual growth of hourly earnings for job changers and stayers, by age group, UK, April 2012 to April 2021
Accommodation and food services continue to report the highest proportion of businesses with worker shortages19 May 2022
In early May 2022, businesses that had not permanently stopped trading were asked if their businesses were currently experiencing a shortage of workers. 

The accommodation and food service activities industry reported the largest proportion of businesses experiencing worker shortages (34%) Worker shortages, businesses not permanently stopped trading, broken down by industry, weighted by count, UK, 3 May to 15 May 2022
Source: Office for National Statistics – Business Insights and Conditions Survey
Notes:
Industries may not sum to 100% because of rounding and percentages less than 1% being removed for disclosure purposes.
“Mining and quarrying” and “Water supply, sewerage, waste management and remediation activities” have been removed for disclosure purposes, but their totals are included in “All industries”.
In early May 2022, of businesses that had not permanently stopped trading, 13% reported a shortage of workers, compared with 14% in early April 2022. The accommodation and food service activities industry continued to report the highest proportion of businesses experiencing worker shortages. However , at 34% this was down from 37% in early April 2022. Some businesses from across this industry commented they are experiencing a lack of kitchen staff, such as chefs.

Among all businesses, the most-reported effects of these worker shortages were:

businesses being unable to meet demands, at 50%, unchanged from early April 2022
employees working increased hours, at 40%, down from 43% in early April 2022
pausing trading of some of the business, at 16%, down from 20% in early April 2022
recruiting temporary workers, at 16%, up from 13% in early April 2022
When excluding businesses with fewer than 10 employees, the percentage of affected businesses that reported they were unable to meet demands or had to pause some of the businesses trading was lower, at 45% and 13%, respectively. In comparison, percentages for employees working increased hours or businesses having to recruit temporary workers, were higher, at 56% and 23%, respectively.
System Average Price of gas decreased by 46%19 May 2022
The seven-day rolling average System Average Price (SAP) of gas decreased by 46% in the week to 15 May 2022.

The SAP level is now 14% of that on 10 March 2022, when prices peaked in the rolling seven-day series. Additionally, the SAP is 7% lower compared with the same period last year in the week ending 16 May 2021 according to data from the National Grid.

In consumer behaviour indicators falls were largely seen this week. UK credit and debit card spending decreased by 6 percentage points, seated diners decreased by 10 percentage points and visits to “retail and recreation” locations fell by 3%. Meanwhile, the number of transactions increased in most Pret A Manger regional categories. Users should note that comparisons are made with the previous week, which included the May bank holiday.

According to data from Adzuna and HM Revenue and Customs, total online job adverts decreased by 3% in the week to 13 May 2022, to 133% of their February 2020 average level. Meanwhile, there was an easing in the net balance of businesses reporting a monthly increase in turnover in April 2022 compared with the previous month.
Energy price cap increase leads price rises in April18 May 2022
Consumer prices rose by 7.8% in the 12 months to April 2022, according to the lead measure of the Consumer Prices Index including owner occupiers’ housing costs (CPIH). This is up from 6.2% in the 12 months to March 2022.

The Consumer Prices Index (CPI) rose to 9.0% in April 2022 from 7.0% in March 2022.

The largest upward contribution to the rise in the 12-month inflation rate came from housing and household services. This effect predominantly came from electricity, gas and other fuels, reflecting the increase in the Ofgem price cap, which increased on 1 April 2022.

The second largest contribution came from restaurants and hotels, largely from restaurants, cafes and dancing establishments. This is consistent with the increase in Value Added Tax (VAT) from 12.5% to 20% on 1 April 2022. However, it should be noted that many restaurant and hotels items were imputed last year because of coronavirus lockdowns. The results for this division should therefore be interpreted with caution.

3 of the 12 divisions made 0.1 percentage points or more contributions to the change in the CPIH annual inflation rate Contributions to change in the CPIH 12-month inflation rate, UK, between March and April 2022






LONDON — The British economy grew 7.5% in 2021, official figures revealed Friday, rebounding from its historic 9.4% plunge in 2020 when pandemic restrictions stifled activity.

On a quarterly basis, U.K. GDP (gross domestic product) is estimated to have increased by 1% in the final three months of the year. It follows a downwardly revised 1% increase the previous quarter, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said on Friday.

In December, GDP contracted by 0.2% as the omicron Covid-19 variant forced renewed caution and containment measures, though economists polled by Reuters had expected a more severe 0.6% contraction.

The largest contributors to the quarterly rise in output were from "human health and social work activities driven by increased GP visits at the start of the quarter," according to the ONS, along with a "large increase in coronavirus (Covid-19) testing and tracing activities and the extension of the vaccination programme."

The ONS said economic output in the fourth quarter remained 0.4% below its pre-pandemic level (in the fourth quarter of 2019).

"The UK's self-imposed lockdown to 'protect Christmas' has turned out to have only a mild impact on growth in December. This is an encouraging sign for the health of the economy," said Emma Mogford, fund manager of the Premier Miton Monthly Income Fund.

Though the omicron variant did not present the significant setback initially feared in November, the U.K. economy faces a raft of challenges in 2022.

The Bank of England now expects inflation to peak at 7.2% in April and has imposed back-to-back interest rate hikes for the first time since 2004, taking the main Bank Rate from 0.1% to 0.5%, with more tightening expected.

Meanwhile, the country's energy regulator has increased its price cap by £693 ($938) per year from April 1 because of soaring energy prices, placing further strain on millions of households.

The Bank of England also slashed its GDP growth forecasts last week, cautioning that the impact of inflation means the economy is likely to grow 3.75% in 2022 instead of the 5% it previously projected.

"The cost of living has become a big concern for millions of people and if it continues for a sustained period of time, it will be harmful to the wider economy," said Annabelle Williams, personal finance specialist at British online investment management firm Nutmeg.






Britain’s economy is beginning 2022 on the back foot as record numbers of coronavirus infections and tougher restrictions driven by the Omicron variant cloud the outlook for growth.

It comes after a weaker pace of growth at the end of last year as businesses and households come under mounting pressure from rising energy bills pushing up inflation, as well as shortages of workers and materials. Here are five charts for the UK’s economic prospects in 2022.

GDP
Economic activity has slumped since the emergence of the coronavirus Omicron variant, with people choosing to be cautious due to high infection rates and renewed government restrictions weighing on growth. Economists warn a sustained hit would lead gross domestic product (GDP) to fall in the first few months of 2022.

It comes with the economy within touching distance of its pre-pandemic peak, at just 0.5% below its February 2020 level in October, despite official figures showing the UK lags behind every country in the G7 apart from Japan.

OECD forecasts made before the emergence of Omicron suggested UK growth would slow from 6.9% in 2021 to 4.7% in 2022.
Previous waves of the pandemic have shown a successively smaller hit to GDP compared with the first phase of the emergency, when the economy collapsed by a fifth in a single quarter in spring 2020.

However, there is heightened uncertainty over the severity of Omicron, while households and businesses face additional challenges from rising prices and supply bottlenecks, which will also drag on the economy.

Inflation
British households and businesses are being hit by the highest rate of inflation for a decade, as the fallout from Covid-19 pushes up the cost of raw materials and causes disruption and delays to global supply chains.

With imbalances in supply and demand, and energy prices hitting record highs, the consumer prices index measure of inflation surged to 5.1% in November – the highest rate in a decade. The Bank of England has warned inflation could peak at about 6% in April – three times its target rate of 2%.

Intense pressure is expected in April when Ofgem lifts its price cap on household gas and electricity bills. The energy industry has warned domestic prices could rise by as much as 50%, labelling the situation a “national crisis” amid record wholesale costs.

City investors expect the Bank to raise interest rates to 1% by late summer to keep a lid on inflation, with the first of several incremental moves from the current rate of 0.25% coming in February.

However, not all economists expect such a sharp rise, warning that the economic recovery from Covid-19 may prove to be weaker than hoped. Threadneedle Street also expects inflation to fade as Covid disruption abates.

Income squeeze
Alongside high rates of inflation, there are warnings that stalling wage growth and planned tax rises from the government will make 2022 the “year of the squeeze” in a development likely to dominate political debate.

UK real incomes
According to the Resolution Foundation thinktank, the increase in the energy price cap will combine with the government’s new health and social care levy on national insurance and a freeze on the personal income tax allowance from April, at a cost of £1,200 for families.

Economists at HSBC estimate UK households will suffer a 1.7% drop in real income levels this year, taking into account the combined effects of inflation, withdrawn pandemic support and tax increases from the government.

“Partly as a consequence of this, we see household consumption slowing from here – and ending 2022 still below pre-pandemic levels,” said Elizabeth Martins, a senior economist at the bank.

Unemployment
Unemployment in Britain continued to fall late last year despite the end of the furlough scheme at the end of September, amid record numbers of job vacancies and severe shortages of staff in several sectors of the economy.

Omicron threatens to push up unemployment in the hardest-hit sectors, such as hospitality and travel. However, many economists still forecast the unemployment rate will drop in early 2022 to just under 4%, returning to pre-pandemic levels, and representing about 1.4 million unemployed.

With ongoing disruption in the jobs market, the number of working-age adults in economic inactivity – those out of the workforce and not looking for a job – has risen by almost 400,000 since the start of Covid to about 8.7 million.

While the government is keen to point to a rise in the number of staff on company payrolls to 29.4 million, around half a million above pre-pandemic levels, official figures show employment – including self-employment – remains almost 600,000 below pre-Covid levels, at about 32.5 million.

Public finances
The UK government is on track to record a budget deficit – the gap between public spending and income from taxes – of £183bn in the financial year to the end of March 2022, according to the Office for Budget Responsibility. Although a sharp reduction from a peacetime record of £320bn in 2020-21, it will still be the second-highest on record – surpassing the peak incurred due to the 2008 financial crisis.

As a result, the national debt – the combined total of every deficit – has risen above £2tn, close to 100% of GDP.

Economists have warned that inflation could push up the deficit by more than expected over the coming months, due to higher payments on inflation-linked debt as rising interest rates pushing up servicing costs for the government. However, economists note that interest payments still remain low compared with historical standards.






The United Kingdom exited the European Union in January, and then faced the public health and economic challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic. The government’s response to both highlighted its willingness to set aside human rights for the sake of political expediency and a worrying disdain for the rule of law. Black and Asian people were disproportionately impacted by Covid-19, while growing numbers depended on food banks to get by. Survivors of the Grenfell Tower fire and Black British citizens from the Windrush generation harmed by UK immigration policy awaited justice. The UK took positive steps to strengthen international human rights protection, and showed leadership on Belarus and Hong Kong, yet with no clear strategy on human rights in foreign policy equivocated in the face of abuses by Saudi Arabia and other states.

[Image: 202009eca_uk_universal credit_thumbnail]  
The Rule of Law and Human Rights
During the course of the year, the UK government showed a willingness to weaken the rule of law and democratic institutions that constrained its authority, in ways that put human rights at risk.

The government sought in February, to restrict media access to the Prime Minister’ office and in August banned a media outlet from Ministry of Defense press conferences, raising concerns about media freedom.

In July, the government announced a panel of experts to review the power of courts to hold the executive to account, a move motivated by a desire to curb court powers. 

In September, the government introduced legislation that would breach the Brexit treaty agreed with the EU the previous October, which a minister admitted in parliament “does break international law in a very specific and limited way.” The move prompted widespread criticism in the UK and abroad, including concerns about the negative impact on human rights in Northern Ireland.

The possibility that the UK might end the year without a deal with the EU on future relations raised concerns about a negative impact on food and medicine supplies, on human rights in Northern Ireland and that the UK might seek to water down employment and other rights derived from EU law in future.

Covid-19
The Covid-19 pandemic had a widespread impact on life in the UK. WHO data showed that as of October 28, the UK had the most Covid-19 deaths in Europe with 45,365 dying of complications from the disease, many of them in facilities for older people. Specific concerns arose around as to whether the UK government had acted swiftly enough to protect the rights to life and health of people in these facilities.

In June, health authorities set out recommendations to reduce the health inequalities highlighted by the pandemic’s disproportionate impact on the UK’s Black and Minority Ethnic (BAME) population and on BAME healthcare workers in particular. At time of writing the government had failed to implement the recommendations.

Legal experts criticized the government’s rushed emergency legislation in response to the pandemic for being uneven in its approach and unclear in its implementation. The UK parliament’s human rights committee raised concerns that Covid-19 laws affecting fundamental rights were being passed without effective legislative scrutiny.

The emergency legislation’s increased time limits for detention of people with mental health conditions and relaxation of rules and standards for social care services and assessments raised specific concerns for the rights of people with disabilities and older people during the pandemic.

Despite a record surge in claims for social security support, the government reinstated some of its draconian social security rules, including sanctions on and debt recovery from people’s benefit payments, despite having relaxed restrictions between March and June and temporarily raised benefit levels. Longstanding flaws in the automated calculation of people’s benefits remained a concern.

The UK government used emergency law to relax requirements on local authorities to make adjustments to ensure education delivery for children with disabilities after schools closed in March, raising serious concerns about discrimination and exclusion. Children from families living in poverty were disproportionately affected by disrupted schooling because many lacked the devices or internet access required for distance learning.

The economic downturn triggered by Covid-19 prompted a range of temporary emergency measures to mitigate the human impact, including employment support and a ban on evictions for private tenants. The evictions ban expired in September, with fears that up to 55,000 households in privately rented accommodation could face eviction in coming months.  

Right to Food
The country’s two main food bank networks published statistics showing that reliance on emergency food aid rose markedly after the Covid-19 pandemic, with food parcel distribution close to double the previous year’s levels by May. One network, the Trussell Trust, reported in September that half of its users since the pandemic had never used a food bank before.

The decision by governments across the UK to close schools to contain the pandemic left local authorities struggling to ensure that children from families living in poverty, who often rely on free school meals as their main nutrition, received sufficient food. A flawed electronic system used in England to issue £15 (US$19) per week of supermarket vouchers to replace school meals caused severe problems for schools and families for two months before the system was improved. The government temporarily extended free school meal coverage for the duration of the pandemic to children living in poverty whose immigration status previously left them ineligible.

Migration and Asylum
In May, following a lawsuit brought in March by the nongovernmental organization (NGO) Detention Action, authorities released almost 1,000 immigration detainees who could not be returned to their home countries because of Covid-19 travel restrictions.

As approximately 5,000 migrants and asylum-seekers arrived irregularly by boat from France in the first 9 months of the year, the government threatened to opt out of the human rights law and use offshore detention and processing to facilitate the deportation of those arriving.

The UK continued to detain asylum-seeking children and migrant children facing deportation.

In March, an independent government-ordered review into the authorities’ treatment of a group of British citizens, primarily from the Caribbean, wrongly threatened with deportation or deported from the UK with widespread consequences for their rights and wellbeing, published its findings. The report said the treatment of the group, known as the “Windrush generation,” by the government as a result of its “hostile environment” migration policy demonstrated an “institutional ignorance and thoughtlessness … consistent with some elements of the definition of institutional racism.”

Campaigners and parliamentarians criticized the compensation scheme established in 2019 for not working fast enough, as members of the Windrush generation with claims pending died during the year, and only a small fraction of claims were settled.

Accountability for the Grenfell Tower Fire
Accountability remained elusive more than 3 years after the Grenfell Tower fire in London that killed 71 people. A statutory public inquiry was ongoing into the fire which destroyed an apartment block of primarily social housing, and its second phase began in September. At time of writing the government had yet to implement the first set of recommendations of the inquiry published in January or find a solution for owners of private apartments in buildings with similar dangerous cladding.

In February, the Attorney General agreed to grant immunity from future prosecution to a number of building contractors and architects concerned about self-incrimination, angering fire survivors and relatives of those killed.

Reproductive Rights
UK parliament regulations providing legal abortion in Northern Ireland in any circumstances up to the twelfth week of gestation, entered into force in March. However, reproductive rights advocates reported that women seeking abortions in Northern Ireland continued to face obstacles from some healthcare professionals unwilling to carry out the procedure.

In March and April, in response to rising need for safe abortion services during the Covid-19 pandemic, authorities in Scotland, Wales, and England, temporarily eased restrictions to allow for self-management of medical abortions at home, a safe and effective method that avoids unnecessary surgical procedures and complies with public health guidance on self-isolation.

After serious delays, in September, the Department for Education introduced compulsory age-appropriate comprehensive sexuality education for primary and secondary students in England.

Violence Against Women and Girls
The UK fell within the global trend of escalating reports of violence against women during the Covid-19 pandemic. Groups providing assistance to victims of domestic violence, reported a surge in requests for help from women and girls and noted that remote services and English-only government campaigns disadvantaged BAME women in particular from accessing services. Anti-domestic violence groups raised concerns about the end of a £37 million ($48m) emergency fund to support services to women and girls experiencing violence. A draft law intended to help women who experience domestic violence fails to adequately protect migrant women.

In July, following a legal challenge and pressure from the UK’s information oversight body, police scrapped the controversial “digital strip search” approach, which required rape victims to disclose their full mobile phone data to investigators.

Government data showed that prosecutions and convictions for rape hit a record low for the year ending March 2020. The Crown Prosecution Service launched a new five-year strategy for prosecuting rape and other serious sexual offences.

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In March, the Court of Appeal ruled that human rights law did not require British passport authorities to provide a non-binary X gender marker on identity documents. In September, the government walked back plans to amend the Gender Recognition Act that would have allowed for legal gender recognition based on self-declaration.

Military Abuses and Impunity
In March, the government introduced legislation in the Overseas Operations Bill creating a “presumption against prosecution” for members of the armed forces accused of crimes, including torture, committed overseas more than five years ago. It remained pending in Parliament at time of writing.

Counterterrorism
About 100 UK nationals, including 60 children, remain held without judicial review in squalid camps and prisons for ISIS suspects and family members in northeast Syria. In July, the Court of Appeal in London ruled that Shamima Begum, an Islamic State (ISIS) suspect stripped of her UK citizenship in 2019 after travelling to Syria as a teenager, should be able to return from detention in northeast Syria to the UK to challenge the deprivation of her nationality.

In September, the government shared intelligence with US authorities about Alexanda Kotey and El Shafee Elsheikh allowing US prosecutions of the two high-profile ISIS suspects to proceed. The Supreme Court authorized the intelligence transfer following an assurance by the US government that the two men, stripped of their UK citizenship in 2018, would not face the death penalty.

Foreign Policy
The UK government’s global human rights sanctions mechanism launched in July, allowing asset freezes and travel bans for those implicated in killings, torture, and forced labor. The mechanism underscored the need for a human rights strategy to ensure a more consistent approach to rights in UK foreign policy.

The welcome initial designation of officials from Saudi Arabia over the state killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi was overshadowed by a decision to resume arms sales to the Saudi-led coalition the following day, despite clear evidence of the coalition’s responsibility for war crimes in Yemen.

The UK strengthened its response to the human rights crackdown in Hong Kong, working to marshal international condemnation of China’s actions, offering safe haven to Hong Kongers with UK ties, and suspending extradition to Hong Kong. At time of writing, the UK had yet to impose human rights sanctions on officials from China over abuses in Xinjiang or Hong Kong.

The UK played a largely positive role at the United Nations Human Rights Council, including leading a joint statement on China, and supporting a joint statement on Saudi Arabia, creation of a mechanism on Libya, and an urgent debate on Belarus (the UK also showed leadership on Belarus at the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe).

However, it was hesitant to support specific attention at the Human Rights Council to racism in the US or to use its influence to press for stronger action this year at the Human Rights Council on Sri Lanka and at the Security Council on Myanmar and Yemen. Since leaving the EU, the UK has refrained from speaking up against the decline of the rule of law in other European countries, including Hungary and Poland.



