New Zealand Economy is very highly developed and one of the least corrupt countries in the world. New Zealand is an independent country located in the southwestern Pacific Ocean. It comprised two main islands of the North Island, and the South Island, and over 700 tiny islands. With a landmass of 268,021 square kilometers, New Zealand is the 75th largest country in the world. This country is located 2,000 kilometers east of Australia and across the Tasman Sea. Despite being a very small country, New Zealand has a varied topography. It boasts a mountain range called the Southern Alps which is the result of tectonic uplift and volcanic eruptions. Wellington is the capital of New Zealand and Auckland is its largest city.

New Zealand is a member of some international and supranational organizations and groupings like the United Nations (UN), the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty (ANZUS), the ASEAN Plus Six, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Pacific Islands Forum, the Pacific Community, and the Commonwealth of Nations.

Political map of New Zealand

Officially, the country is a parliamentary democratic country with the British monarch as its head. The executive of the country is headed by a Prime Minister while the British monarch is represented by a Governor-General. The country has a population of 5 million which is highly urbanized. The indigenous Māori are the largest minority community followed by Asians and Pacific Islanders. English is the de facto language while Māori and New Zealand Sign Language are the two official languages. New Zealand ranks highly in international indicators like quality of life, civil liberties, government transparency, and economic freedom.
The economy of New Zealand is a highly developed free-market economy. New Zealand economy is the 52nd-largest economy in the world. Like any developed country, the services sector consists of 16.5% of the total GDP as of 2013. Despite this fact, the primary sector continues to dominate the country’s exports. Due to having a high rate of internet usage, New Zealand has a thriving information technology sector. Historically, extractive industries like flax, gold, kauri gum, sealing, whaling, and native timber have played a major role in sustaining the national economy. Apart from services, industry, and agriculture, the tourism sector also plays a major role in the economic wellbeing of the country. The country has a very low level of income disparity and the disposable income of its citizens is very high. It boasts the New Zealand Exchange (NZX) which is the premier capital market of the country. It has 184 companies listed with it and has a market capitalization of NZ$184.87 billion.
New Zealand has 13 preferential trade agreements in force. The trade-weighted average tariff rate is 2.5 percent, and 247 nontariff measures are in effect. Overall, openness to global trade and investment is firmly institutionalized. Banking is well established and competitive. To support the financial system’s stability and liquidity during the pandemic, implementation of a higher capital reserve requirement for banks has been postponed.New Zealand’s economic freedom score is 80.6, making its economy the 4th freest in the 2022 Index. New Zealand is ranked 2nd among 39 countries in the Asia–Pacific region, and its overall score is above the regional and world averages.

New Zealand’s economy was growing smartly in 2017 and 2018 but began to slow in 2019 before contracting in 2020. Growth recovered in 2021. During the past five years, economic freedom has generally been robust, although it has dipped. With higher scores for government integrity and judicial effectiveness overshadowed by score decreases in fiscal health and business freedom, New Zealand has registered an overall 3.1-point loss of economic freedom since 2017 but nevertheless remains in the top, “Free” Index category. The country’s indicators are generally very strong except for the burden of government spending on the economy.
IMPACT OF COVID-19: As of December 1, 2021, 44 deaths had been attributed to the pandemic in New Zealand, and the government’s response to the crisis ranked 7th among the countries included in this Index in terms of its stringency. The economy contracted by 3.0 percent in 2020.
After reaching 5% in 2021, real GDP growth will ease to 3% in 2022 and 2% in 2023. High inflation and rising interest rates will weigh on private consumption. Economic growth will slow but remain solid as pent-up demand during the surge in COVID-19 infections in early 2022 is unleashed and gradual reopening of the border allows the tourism sector to recover. Inflation will decline in 2023 but remain high, as firms pass on global commodity price inflation and workers demand higher wages.
The New Zealand economy recovered quickly from the COVID-19 shock thanks to effective virus containment, measures to protect jobs and incomes and highly expansionary macroeconomic policies but is now overheating and house prices have soared. The Reserve Bank has begun to tighten monetary and macroprudential policies with a view to achieving its price and ﬁnancial stability objectives. Together with policy measures to increase housing supply, this should help moderate housing price inﬂation. While the ﬁscal deﬁcit has begun to fall from the highs reached during the ﬁrst wave of the COVID-19 shock, additional consolidation measures will be needed to put public ﬁnances on a sustainable path, including an increase in the pension eligibility age.
The economy of New Zealand is a highly developed free-market economy.[21] It is the 52nd-largest national economy in the world when measured by nominal gross domestic product (GDP) and the 63rd-largest in the world when measured by purchasing power parity (PPP). New Zealand has a large GDP for its population of 5 million, and sources of revenue are spread throughout the large island nation. The country has one of the most globalised economies and depends greatly on international trade, mainly with Australia, Canada, China, the European Union, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, and the United States. New Zealand's 1983 Closer Economic Relations agreement with Australia means that the economy aligns closely with that of Australia.

New Zealand's diverse economy has a sizable service sector, accounting for 63% of all GDP activity as of 2013.[22] Large-scale manufacturing industries include aluminium production, food processing, metal fabrication, wood and paper products. Mining, manufacturing, electricity, gas, water, and waste services accounted for 16.5% of GDP as of 2013.[22] The primary sector continues to dominate New Zealand's exports, despite accounting for only 6.5% of GDP as of 2013.[22] The information technology sector is growing rapidly.[23]

The major capital market is the New Zealand Exchange (NZX). As of February 2014, NZX had a total of 258 listed securities with a combined market capitalisation of NZD $94.1 billion.[24] New Zealand's currency, the New Zealand dollar (informally known as the "Kiwi dollar") also circulates in four Pacific Island territories. The New Zealand dollar is the 10th-most traded currency in the world.[25]
In a turbulent world, New Zealand stands out as a reassuringly sturdy beacon of economic, political and social stability. 

New Zealand was ranked the world's third most stable country in the Fund for Peace 2016 Fragile States Index.
In 2017 we shared number one spot on Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index measuring the trustworthiness and good functioning of public institutions like the police and judiciary
New Zealand ranks comfortably among the world’s top 10 countries for adherence to the rule of law according to the World Justice Project (WJP) 2017 Rule of Law Index.

We also ranked second on the 2017 Global Peace Index of safest countries to live. You and your family can feel free to come and go in safety, making it easy to enjoy all the sights, adventures and experiences New Zealand has to offer.
New Zealand is one of the world’s most stable democracies.

We have a parliamentary democracy developed from the British model, with a single-chamber House of Representatives. Queen Elizabeth II is head of state in the role of Queen of New Zealand, represented by a resident Governor-General.

We’ve had a form of proportional representation since 1996 and governments are generally coalitions. However voters’ continued strong preference for the two main political parties has resulted in effective governments which usually run their term and are often re-elected. Four of the last five governments in New Zealand have each lasted nine years.

A diverse and representative Parliament has helped keep public engagement with the political process high. Typically 75-80% of New Zealanders vote in general elections.

Political stability and effective governance has translated into the economic sphere. New Zealand has long enjoyed stable economic conditions.

Between 2000 and 2007, our economy expanded by an average of 3.5% each year. The 2008/09 recession was shallow compared to other advanced economies. Since 2010 annual growth has averaged 2.1%. The Government forecasts average growth of over 3% for 2018, and is expected to reach 3.6% in 2019.
