After registering a stronger-than-expected recovery in 2021, the Saudi Arabian economy is on an accelerated path to growth in 2022, driven by higher oil prices and non-oil activities, as oil production strengthens and pandemic pressures fade. Saudi Arabia's direct trade with Russia and Ukraine is limited. Economic fallout on the oil markets from the war in Ukraine has strengthened Saudi Arabia's medium-term fiscal and external outlooks. Any new COVID-19 variants, tighter global financial conditions, and volatile oil prices are key risks.
Recent Developments
Saudi Arabia continues to successfully control adverse impacts of the pandemic despite experiencing an outbreak of the Omicron variant at the end of 2021. With high vaccination rollout reaching 68% of the population, from January 2022 new cases were on a downward trajectory. Globally, Saudi Arabia continues to assume its pivotal role, under the OPEC+ structure, in resolving oil market imbalances through monthly oil production cuts of 0.4 mbpd, which started in July 2021.
Outlook
Growth is expected to accelerate to 7% in 2022 before leveling out at 3.8% and 3.0% in 2023 and 2024, respectively. Stronger oil output is the main driver behind the recovery, which is expected to grow by 13% in 2022 following the end of the OPEC+ production cuts in December 2022. The non-oil sector is expected to continue its trajectory for growth, estimated at 4% in 2022 and 3.2% in the medium-term. Despite headwinds from tighter fiscal and monetary policies in the medium-term, stronger private consumption is anticipated, as well as an increase in religious tourism and higher domestic capital spending—signaled through the PIF and other state agencies. Headline inflation is projected to slow and hover at about 2% in 2022 as result of a stronger US dollar, against which the Saudi Riyal is pegged, and tighter monetary policy.

Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 economic diversification initiatives are generating opportunities for U.S. companies across industry sectors.

Saudi Arabia’s evolution from the Bedouin kingdom it was when President Roosevelt and King Abdul Aziz met aboard the U.S.S. Quincy 77 years ago to the vibrant G20 economy and important U.S. defense and trade partner it is today is truly remarkable.   

Today, the $54 billion U.S.-Saudi Arabia trade and investment relationship creates thousands of jobs in both our countries.  In 2020, U.S. goods exports to Saudi Arabia exceeded $10.9 billion and U.S. imports were just over $9 billion according to the U.S. Census Bureau.  U.S. services exports were $10.3 billion, and imports were $1.2 billion.  According to the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Saudi Arabia increased from $11,117 million in 2019 to $11,386 million in 2020.    For the same period, Saudi Arabia’s FDI in the United States decreased from $7,273 million to $6,262 million. Saudi Arabia is the largest country in the Gulf region with a population of over 35 million, and the largest economy in the Arab World with a GDP of $832.4 billion as of December 31, 2021.  Saudi Arabia’s economy continued to rebound in 2021 with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reporting the Kingdom’s real GDP growth at 4.8 percent and the Saudi Arabian Government projecting a budget surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP.  The Kingdom has significant foreign reserves of approximately $450 billion, its sovereign wealth fund, the Public Investment Fund, has over $400 billion in assets, and it has relatively low levels of debt with a 25.9 percent debt-to-GDP ratio at the end of 2021.

The Saudi Arabian Government exercises control over the main economic activities of the country’s oil-based economy. Saudi Arabia has almost 17 percent of the world’s proven petroleum reserves, plays a principal role in OPEC, is one of the world’s largest producers and exporters of crude oil, and is a large-scale oil refiner and producer of natural gas.  According to the U.S. Department of Energy’s U.S. Energy Information Administration, petroleum exports accounted for nearly 70 percent of the country’s total exports in terms of value in 2020, and about 53 percent of the Saudi government’s revenues were oil-based.

Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 economic diversification initiative, launched in 2016, aims to reduce its dependence on oil and to develop service sectors.  Vision 2030 political, institutional, and financial reforms coupled with significant investment by Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund are generating opportunities for foreign companies across industry sectors including renewable energy, transportation, healthcare, advanced technology, and aerospace as well as across a series of giga-projects including the $500 billion NEOM cognitive and smart city development in northwestern Saudi Arabia, the Qiddiya entertainment and sports megaproject in Riyadh, and The Red Sea Project – a sustainable luxury tourist destination.

Local government
The kingdom is divided into 13 administrative regions (manāṭiq), which in turn are divided into numerous districts. Regional governors are appointed, usually from the royal family, and preside over one or more municipal councils, half of whose members are appointed and half elected. With their councils, the governors are responsible for such functions as finance, health, education, agriculture, and municipalities. The consultative principle operates at all levels of government, including the government of villages and tribes.

Legal status of women
Saudi Arabia has a legal system that requires all Saudi women to have a male legal guardian. The guardians have authority to make a number of decisions on behalf of women, similar to the authority a legal guardian has over a minor. Typically, a woman’s guardian is her father until her marriage, her husband during their marriage, or her brother or son if she has neither a father nor a husband. Legally, women no longer need permission to work or study, though many employers and universities continue to require permission as a condition of employment or enrollment.

Technological advances, particularly in telecommunications, have improved the efficiency of the system. Starting in 2010, permission to travel could be granted through SMS text messaging. With the emergence of smartphones, guardians were able to grant permission through a government-sponsored smartphone app called Absher. For some, this allowed women to travel more and do more without the attendance of a male guardian. But it also made it easier for male guardians to track and control women.

Justice
The Sharīʿah is the basis of justice. Judgment usually is according to the Ḥanbalī tradition of Islam; the law tends to be conservative and punishment severe, including amputation for crimes such as theft and execution for crimes that are deemed more severe (e.g., drug trafficking and practicing witchcraft).

In 1970 the Ministry of Justice was established; its work is assisted by a Supreme Judicial Council consisting of leading members of the ʿulamāʾ. There are more than 300 Sharīʿah courts across the country. Rapid changes since the mid-20th century have produced circumstances—such as traffic violations and industrial accidents—not encompassed by traditional law, and these have been handled by the issuance of royal decrees. These decrees have evolved into a body of administrative law that is not directly drawn from Islamic precepts. Avenues of appeal are available, and the monarch is both the final court of appeal and the dispenser of pardon.

Political process
Participation in the political process is limited to a relatively small portion of the population. There are no elections for national bodies, and political parties are outlawed. Women’s participation in politics is traditionally limited, although women were allowed to run for seats on municipal councils beginning in 2015. Power rests largely in the hands of the royal family, which governs through a process that—despite the political and economic changes since the late 20th century—differs little from the traditional system of tribal rule. Tribal identity remains strong and is still an important pillar of social control. Despite the existence of a modern state bureaucracy, political influence is frequently determined by tribal affiliation. Tribal sheikhs, therefore, maintain a high degree of authority within the tribe and a considerable degree of influence over local and national events.

The tribal hierarchy in the country is complex. There are a number of smaller, less influential tribes and a handful of very influential major tribes. The Saud family, although not a tribe strictly speaking, behaves like one in many respects. Although the ruling family came to power largely through its martial skill and religious ties, its continued hegemony has been based on the traditional view in Arabian society that leaders owe their positions to their ability to manage affairs. Just as the tribal sheikh leads the tribe, so has the Saud family ruled the country—by placating rival factions, building a broad consensus, and squelching extreme voices. (Early Orientalists used the Latin phrase primus inter pares, “first among equals,” to refer to such an arrangement.) The medium for this process is the traditional dīwān, an informal council in which the senior male (whether he is a sheikh at the tribal level or the king at the national level) hears outstanding grievances and dispenses justice and largess. In theory, any male citizen may make his voice heard in the dīwān.

In this system succession to the throne is not directly hereditary, though under the Basic Law of Government the king must be a son or grandson of Ibn Saud. Traditionally, the heir apparent, who is also deputy prime minister, has been determined by a consensus of the royal family, but since 1992 he has been appointed by the king (confirmation by the family occurring only after the monarch’s death). In 2006 the Allegiance Commission, a council comprising 35 members of the royal family, was formed to participate in the selection of the crown prince. The royal family may also decide by consensus to depose the monarch, as was seen in King Saud’s deposition in 1964.

The family has also relied heavily on its long relationship with the Wahhābī religious hierarchy to maintain social and political control. The crown appoints all major religious functionaries, who are almost exclusively selected from Wahhābī ʿulamāʾ; in turn it is supported by that sect. Most major threats to the political status quo have come either from dissident factions within the religious community or from groups that appeal in some way to Islamic values. Many of these groups have operated abroad, and a number have been involved in political violence.

Security
Military service is voluntary. The army accounts for about three-fifths of the total military force. It experienced rapid modernization especially after the Arab-Israeli War of 1967. The air force was equipped largely by the British until the 1970s, when the kingdom began to buy aircraft from the United States. It is now one of the best-equipped forces in the region, with several hundred high-performance aircraft; likewise, ground forces have large numbers of state-of-the-art main battle tanks. Army officers are trained at King Abdulaziz Military Academy just north of Riyadh. Major air bases are at Riyadh, Dhahran, Ḥafar al-Bāṭin (part of the King Khālid Military City) near the border with Iraq and Kuwait, Tabūk in the northwest near Jordan, and Khamīs Mushayṭ in the southwest near Yemen. All three armed services—army, air force, and navy—are directed by the defense minister, who is also the second deputy prime minister.The National Guard, which has roughly the same troop strength as the army, is essentially an internal security force, though it can support the regular forces for national defense. One of its primary peacetime tasks is to guard the country’s oil fields. It is administered separately, and its commander reports to the crown prince. The armed forces employ expatriate personnel in support and training positions.

The kingdom has several internal security organs, including the Coast Guard, Frontier Force, and a centralized national police force. All of these organizations report to the Ministry of the Interior, which also supervises the country’s intelligence and counterintelligence bodies. Police interaction with civilians, particularly with foreigners, has often been described as heavy-handed, but reports of human rights abuses are far less numerous and severe than those reported in other countries of the region. There is also a religious police force attached to the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice. Known as the Muṭawwaʿūn (colloquially, Muṭawwaʿīn), this force operates in plain clothes and enforces such Islamic precepts as ensuring that women are properly veiled, that shops close during prayer, and that the fast is kept during Ramadan. Imposing impromptu corporal punishment for infractions is an accepted part of their duty.

Health and welfare
A great deal of attention has been given to health care, and the numbers of hospital beds, physicians, and nurses have increased greatly. In addition to numerous health institutes, hospitals, and health centres, a network of dispensaries serving communities of 10,000 or more people has been set up, complemented by a system of mobile health services reaching small communities and the remaining nomadic populations. The government has also begun to train Saudis to replace foreign medical personnel. Of serious concern are a high rate of trachoma and occasional outbreaks of malaria, bilharzia (schistosomiasis), and cholera. Outbreaks of serious diseases such as meningitis have occurred during the hajj.

The crackdown continued on the rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. The Specialized Criminal Court handed down heavy prison terms to individuals for their human rights work and expression of dissenting views. Among those arbitrarily detained, prosecuted or sentenced were human rights defenders, government critics and other political activists. Women human rights defenders were subjected to judicially imposed travel bans following conditional release from prison. Courts resorted extensively to the death penalty and people were executed for a wide range of crimes. Migrant workers continued to be vulnerable to abuse and exploitation under the country’s sponsorship system, and tens of thousands were arbitrarily detained and subsequently deported. Prison authorities violated the right to health of human rights defenders and others imprisoned after grossly unfair trials.

Rapid urbanization contributed to the weakening of kinship networks and community ties in Saudi Arabia. Many extended families used to live together in large compounds on plots of land outside of major cities, which the government provided. But while four out of five Saudis lived in rural areas in 1950, only one in six do today. With more Saudis living in cities, real estate in urban areas has become so expensive that family compounds are now considered a luxury that most cannot afford. Government housing policies also lead extended families to live further apart. As a result, relatives see each other less often and do not feel as close. Urbanization has also diluted regional identities and eroded community cohesion. There are increasing cases of intermarriage between members of different tribes, but some Saudis described tribal identity as “the elephant in the room” when it comes to finding a suitable marriage prospect, emphasizing one aspect of its enduring salience.

Although technology facilitates new forms of communication, some Saudis said it makes them feel less connected to their relatives. A Saudi journalist described how his relatives all use phones at the dinner table and do not chat as they did before. However, technology is facilitating the formation of new networks between Saudis who would not previously have had the chance to mix, including professional networks, interest groups, and connections between boys and girls. Most Saudis agreed that these new “chosen” networks lack the resources to provide for their members as kinship networks do.

Saudis noted that while many of these trends are longer term, the government has been inserting itself more assertively into matters of kinship ties. While the Saudi state has not tried to supplant tribal networks, it has been stepping up its efforts to co-opt them more completely. For example, it has become more deliberate appointing Interior Ministry delegates to tribes, more often choosing a rival to the tribe’s acknowledged leader. That not only creates an alternative center of power in the tribe that is explicitly pro-government, but it also weakens a tribe’s ability to act as an independent check on governmental power.

Some Saudis described a resurgence of tribal identity in recent years to be motivated by a “yearning for familiarity in times of great uncertainty.” But they agreed that tribes lack the resources to provide the services and protection for their members as they did before. Tribes may help in special occasions, such as subsidizing poorer tribesmen’s wedding costs or bailing others out of jail, but they do not hold the same significance in most Saudis’ day-to-day lives. Some younger Saudis expressed their resentment about enduring tribal obligations. A young Bedouin described tribal gatherings that used to be key social events as “sad affairs,” which “glorify poetry to obscure the superficial nature of tribalism today.”

Saudis perceived a strong government-led drive to create a specific Saudi identity, as local identities have lost their salience. They described state efforts to construct national identity in opposition to other identities, such as a broader Muslim identity, Iranian identity, or specific regional identities. Saudis largely ridiculed efforts to instill nationalism in the curriculum at school and argued the state is struggling to define what it means to be Saudi and what the state expects of its citizens. One Bedouin said that the state treats its citizens like subjects: citizens are expected to fulfill duties and remain loyal, but the state has no responsibilities to them.

The increasingly authoritarian political environment has weakened traditional support networks and shaped Saudis’ social obligations, incentives, and options. A growing fear of repression has shifted notions of trust and expectations of assistance from family or friends in cases of friction with the state. One Saudi activist said he would no longer expect his family or friends to come to his aid if he was arrested, as the risks to them would be too great. This new political environment means that individuals can no longer feel sure about the obligations their kin feel to them, shifting the nature of those relationships.

Yet, changing social ties in Saudi Arabia should not be exaggerated. The family remains the basic unit of society, and young people continue to feel a huge sense of duty to their parents and other relatives. One young Saudi said that young people are still not able to reject arranged marriages; they can only hope to delay them. The number of Saudis who return to the Kingdom after finishing their studies abroad is a testament to the enduring value of family ties and Saudis’ desire to live near their relatives. While forming new “chosen” networks with like-minded peers is desirable for many young Saudis, interviewees agreed that these networks lack the resources to supplant kinship networks.

Although long-term trends have eroded the importance of kinship ties, Saudis stressed that the Kingdom remains a deeply conservative state and that kinship networks still try to help their own when they can. But Saudis perceived MBS’s reforms to be undermining and weakening many of those networks, and they argued that adaptation strategies would be necessary to make it through the bumpy ride. Those strategies are still being developed.