Political Factors
The political risk in Singapore is quite low. In fact, the Political And Economic Risk Consultancy (PERC) states that the country enjoys the lowest political risk in the continent. It is a democratic country. The people elect representatives to lead the nation. Since its independence, they cherished relative political stability. Today, the stability has translated to peace and a better standard of living. Moreover, It has transformed into improved business opportunities for Singapore.

However, there have been reports about restriction of free speech for opposition parties in Singapore. It is said that the value of free speech for the parties is limited. The defamation laws require opposition parties to be careful that political comments do not lead to costly defamation suits or imprisonment.

The fear of legal suits limits the potential of free speech for opposition parties in Singapore. Another factor is limited dissemination of content. These discourage the opposition parties. As a result, the contribution to free speech activities and inter-party debates is low.

Economic Factors
The economy of Singapore is a vibrant free-market economy. It is developing at a very fast pace. The country’s per-capita income is the highest in ASEAN. A corruption-free environment supports the business sector.  It is among the most competitive countries. The educated and motivated workers strengthen it. The legal and financial business framework helps as well.

Recently, the government has invested in diversifying the economy. As a result, the tourism, pharmaceutical, and many other industries have flourished. One of the main reasons behind the success is its strategic geographic location. The government is an imperative and active player. It owns substantial productive assets. Cheaper labor cost from neighboring countries helps Singapore save a lot of costs.

Some constraints on Singapore’s economic performance are the following:

Labor shortages
Rising labor costs
Declines in productivity
Social Factors
Socially, Singapore is like any other Eastern country. It still follows traditional family values. It is true that the younger generation has the tendency to follow western culture and values. The residents work hard and fulfill the materialism desire. This urge to do well has increased nation productivity. The business sectors can, therefore, expect higher purchasing power from customers. Reports suggest that most Singaporeans dislike blue collar jobs like construction.

Literacy rate in the country is very high. Primary schooling is compulsory in Singapore. Parents must ensure children’s regular attendance. Good command of English and Chinese languages gives Singaporeans an advantage. It helps to attract international trade and foreign investment.

Technological Factors
I can assure that one of the main reasons behind the change in lifestyle and quality of life is the technological advancement.

As you might have guessed, the internet plays a role in Singapore’s advancement. It eased communication and increases connectivity. The cost and time of conducting business lowered. It also boosted the social networking. The residents could easily connect to the rest of the world.

The IT infrastructure in Singapore is praise-worthy. The penetration rate for household broadband internet is over 70%. E-commerce and eB2Cmodels have flourished in turn. More than 10Mbps of broadband internet service is available. The widespread IT infrastructure has encouraged multinational companies to set up regional operations in Singapore. The government is also moving towards an electronic government era.

Legal Factors
The government thinks that growth of electronic commerce depends on transparent and market favorable legislations and regulations. Certain legal, regulatory and business settings are needed to support industry development and economic growth.

E-commerce program was launched in 1996. The aim was to develop the e-commerce services. Singapore has introduced some e-commerce policy initiatives. There are cross-border e-commerce laws and policies. Some basic legal and technical infrastructures to support secure e-commerce were available since 1998. Some of them are Electronic Transactions Act, Intellectual Property Rights, Amendments to the Evidence Act, Content Regulation, Tax Issues and Import and Export Procedures.

Environmental Factors
The Ministry of the Environment and Anti-Pollution Unit works relentlessly to maintain air quality and other environmental factors. Pollution from the transportation is the key problem in Singapore’s urban areas. There was a time when Singapore was among countries with the highest level of industrial carbon dioxide emissions.

Singapore lost almost 30% of its mangrove area. Many species are in danger of extinction.

The Water Pollution Control and Drainage Act helps control water quality. One of the major concerns for Singaporeans is that the country does not have enough water to support their needs. Pollution from the industrial byproducts like oil increases the problem. As a solution, water is recycled after desalination.

As there is a lack of water resources, Singapore is dependent on Malaysian supplied water.  A local brand called NEWater supplies sewage water after purifying it using dual-membrane. More solutions to this problem are needed.

After analyzing all these factors, It is clear that Singapore is a remarkable country. It houses talented and motivated people. It also provides great business opportunities. I can conclude that its business success in both domestic and international platforms is highly benefited by government policies. Its enterprise friendly approach boosts business as well. Singapore’s continuing development has made it a major competitor in the international market. The compulsory primary education and hardworking citizen are contributing factors.

On Singapore being named the world’s richest country, Seah Chiang Nee wrote in The Star, “The news has evidently impressed the world more than it did Singaporeans. The reason is that the majority of citizens here are too concerned with the structured high cost of living that collective wealth has bestowed. It has made the city one of the most expensive in the world. On perspective, however, most Singaporeans have benefitted from the progress over the generation. A minority has prospered greatly. According to the Wall Street Journal, Singapore’s per capita GDP has reached US$56,532 (RM175,250) in 2010 – measured by purchasing power parity. This has beaten Norway, the United States and Hong Kong. By most standards, this would have been reason to bring out the champagne bottle, but because of the extraordinary circumstances, the majority of Singaporeans are not cheering. Since the report, the number of centa-millionaires – people with more than US$100 mil (RM310 mil) – has grown 13 percent, higher than the global average at 6 percent. The problem is that it is predicted to grow by another 44 percent by 2016, which probably means higher inflation for all. [Source: Seah Chiang Nee, The Star, Malaysia, August 25, 2012 ]

“The fact is that Singaporeans – already hit by one of the world’s highest inflation rates – are too burdened by expensive housing, cars and general living expenses to be cheerful. Yet, there is no denying that the majority of Singaporeans are living better than they ever had. Singapore has been transformed into a middle class society and now has the dubious title of being the wealthiest in the world. But in the past five years, living standards have taken a turn for the worse for many people despite the collective affluence. An influx of cheap-cost foreigners has resulted in acute shortage and income stagnation in many cases.

“So why are Singaporeans so unimpressed with living in the richest land in the world? The reasons are as follows: 1) Some 37 percent of residents are foreigners, quite a few of them ultra-wealthy. The import of billionaires provides little or no benefits to the average citizens except pushing up prices. Take the foreigner portion away and the city could be that much poorer; and 2) A large part of the wealth is in corporate hands rather than with individuals. Not all of it ends up in big-paying jobs for locals.

“As a result of the large amount of money sloshing around, prices of things like houses, cars and healthcare are rising with no sign of abating. Many loans and mortgages are increasing. Forbes recently reported: “The latest list of wealthy Singaporeans showed lots of money sloshing around Singapore – but it may just be the tip of the iceberg.” Good news? I don’t think so. No Singaporeans are crazy enough to pray for poverty, but extreme wealth in the hands of a few is just as bad. Without that the economic gap here is already the world’s widest.

“This rising wealth is greeted with pride by a few elderly citizens who remember their poorer past. But, by and large, Singaporeans have reacted cynically to it. Prominent blogger dawning bread wrote: “There might have been a time when people here would have taken pride in such an accolade.” Now, he said, the publication of the news on page one of the major newspaper, the Straits Times, “must have annoyed a lot of people”. “I don’t feel rich,” another Singaporean said. How could Singapore be richer than Switzerland or the US? “Statistics can be toyed around to fit any agenda. Look around you – does this look like the richest country on the planet?” asked Invictus.”

Singapore is the 10th most expensive city in the world. The two factors – wealth and high cost – are related; if cost of living is taken into account Singapore’s wealth ranking drops third to 11th in the world. Inflation clouds everyone’s lives, unless he is among the 188,000 millionaire households, to which it probably matters much less. A school-teacher commented: “Being told that I am living in one of the world’s richest cities doesn’t profit my life and the resultant high cost is a blow.”

In October 2021, Parliament passed the draconian Foreign Interference (Counter-Measures) Act (FICA). The law gives sweeping powers to the home minister to require removal or disabling of online content, publication of mandatory messages drafted by the government, banning of apps from being downloadable in Singapore, and disclosure of information by internet and social media companies, reinforced by severe criminal penalties and with judicial review limited to procedural matters. 

The government can also designate individuals as “politically significant persons,” after which they may be required to follow strict limits on sources of funding and to disclose all links with foreigners. The law’s broad language encompasses a wide range of ordinary activities by civil society, academics, and journalists who engage with non-Singaporeans in doing their work.

The government maintains strict restrictions on the right to peaceful assembly through the Public Order Act (POA), requiring a police permit for any “cause-related” assembly if it is held in a public place or in a private venue if members of the general public are invited. The definition of what is treated as an assembly is extremely broad, and those who fail to obtain the required permits face criminal charges.

Even a single person standing alone holding a sign has been treated as an “assembly” requiring a permit. In March 2021, the police announced they were investigating Louis Ng, a member of parliament, for possible violation of the POA based on social media photos showing him alongside several food hawkers holding a sign saying, “support them.” Ng said the posting was intended to encourage residents to support the hawkers.

The Public Order Act provides the police commissioner with authority to reject any permit application for an assembly or procession “directed towards a political end” if any foreigner is found to be involved. In February 2021, the police announced an investigation of three individuals who had held a brief protest outside the Myanmar embassy. The authorities said that permits would not be granted for any protest related to political issues in other countries.

Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
Singapore’s restrictive laws are frequently used against activists and media critical of the government. Activist Jolovan Wham faced multiple charges under the POA for peaceful protests, including standing by himself with a sign. On February 15, 2021, Wham pleaded guilty to violating the POA for organizing a 2017 silent protest on the rapid transit system. He also pleaded guilty to vandalism for taping a piece of paper on the window and to refusing to sign a police statement. He was sentenced to a fine of S$8,000 (US$5,900) or imprisonment for 32 days. Wham paid the fine for refusing to sign the police statement but opted to serve the default jail term of 22 days for the other offenses.

In August 2021, Wham was tried on charges of holding an unlawful assembly for briefly holding up a sign in front of the courthouse, taking a photo, and leaving. Wham is also facing unlawful assembly charges, filed in November 2020, for standing in front of a police station holding a placard bearing a “smiley face” in support of two young activists under investigation.

In March 2021, the High Court of Singapore ordered blogger and activist Leong Sze Hian to pay Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong S$133,000 (US$98,600) in damages for sharing a link on his Facebook page, without comment, to an article alleging that the prime minister was a target of a corruption investigation.

Lawyers defending inmates on death row have faced repercussions. In May 2021, the Court of Appeal fined lawyer M. Ravi S$5,000 (US$3,700) for making an “unmeritorious” application to reopen the case of a death row defendant.

Freedom of Media 
Authorities have repeatedly targeted The Online Citizen, one of the few independent media outlets in Singapore, and its editor, Terry Xu. On August 19, 2021, the attorney general began contempt proceedings against Xu over the portal’s January 2021 republication of a blog post on Singapore’s legal system. Singapore’s Administration of Justice (Protection) Act contains overly broad and vague powers to punish for contempt, with penalties of up to three years in prison or a fine of S$50,000 (US$37,000).

On September 3, 2021, Xu was found liable for defaming the prime minister by publishing an article about a dispute between Prime Minister Lee and his siblings about their family home. The author of the article was also found liable. The court awarded Lee S$160,000 (US$118,600) in general damages and S$50,000 (US$37,000) in aggravated damages, and, on October 13, ordered Xu to pay nearly S$88,000 (US$65,000) in legal fees and disbursements. On September 14, the InfoComm Media Development Authority suspended The Online Citizen’s license for alleged violation of media funding rules.

New Naratif, an online media outlet focusing on issues in Southeast Asia, was accused of violating campaign regulations during the 2020 general election by paying to boost certain posts. After a year-long investigation in which the police twice interrogated New Naratif’s founder and managing director, Dr. Thum Ping Tjin, raided his home, and seized his laptop and mobile phone, the police issued a “stern warning” in the case.

Criminal Justice System
Singapore retains the death penalty, which is mandated for many drug offenses and certain other crimes. However, under provisions introduced in 2012, judges have some discretion to bypass the mandatory penalty and sentence low-level offenders to life in prison and caning. There is little transparency on the timing of executions, which often take place with short notice.

In March 2021, the High Court confirmed that the Singapore Prison Service had forwarded private correspondence of 13 death row inmates to the attorney-general without their consent. The High Court dismissed an application brought by 22 death row inmates for information about disclosure of the letters.

Use of corporal punishment is common in Singapore. For medically fit males ages 16 to 50, caning is mandatory for a wide range of crimes. Such caning constitutes torture under international law.

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The rights of LGBT people in Singapore are severely restricted. At time of writing, the Court of Appeal had yet to issue an opinion on appeals from a High Court decision rejecting three constitutional challenges to Criminal Code section 377A, which makes sexual relations between two male persons a criminal offense. There are no legal protections against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. Singapore precludes LGBT groups from registering and operating legally.

In May 2021, the government warned the US Embassy “not to interfere” in domestic political or social matters, including “how sexual orientation should be dealt with in public policy,” after the embassy co-hosted a webinar with a Singapore nongovernmental organization that supports LGBTIQ individuals.

Migrant Workers and Labor Exploitation
Foreign migrant workers are subject to labor rights abuses and exploitation through exorbitant debts owed to recruitment agents, non-payment of wages, restrictions on movement, confiscation of passports, and sometimes physical and sexual violence. Foreign women employed as domestic workers are particularly vulnerable to violence. In June 2021, an employer was sentenced to 30 years in prison for torturing and killing her domestic worker.

Work permits of migrant workers in Singapore are tied to a particular employer, leaving them extremely vulnerable to exploitation. Foreign domestic workers, who are covered by the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act rather than the Employment Act, are excluded from many key labor protections, such as limits on daily work hours and mandatory days off. In July 2021, the Ministry of Manpower announced limited new measures to protect migrant domestic workers from abuse, including one mandatory day off per month, post-placement interviews, and enhancement of required medical check-ups.

Many migrant workers in Singapore are housed in crowded dormitories, with up to 20 people sharing a room and communal bathrooms, in unsanitary conditions that increased the risk of Covid-19. Since April 2020, workers living in dormitories have been unable to leave them except for work under Covid-19 related restrictions. In September 2021, the government announced a pilot scheme to allow up to 500 fully vaccinated migrant workers per week to leave the dormitories to visit specific designated areas.

Key International Actors
Singapore is a regional hub for international business and maintains good political and economic relations with both the United States, which considers it a key security ally, and China. During visits to the city-state in 2021, neither US Vice President Kamala Harris nor US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin publicly raised Singapore’s poor human rights record.

In May, Singapore underwent its third Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva. During the review, states made a large number of recommendations, including to address issues related to migrant workers, anti-discrimination legislation, and freedom of expression.

In a 2016 survey of 2,000 Singaporeans, 53 per cent indicated that racism is not an important problem in contemporary Singapore1. However, more recent research has found that racial discrimination exists in Singapore in at least one key aspect: jobs.

A study published in 2019 – led by Dr Peter Chew, Senior Lecturer in Psychology at James Cook University in Singapore – looked at the effects of race on hiring decisions in a simulated hiring decision task.

A total of 171 Singaporean Chinese undergraduates were randomly assigned into one of nine groups and asked to review a resume of a job applicant. The resumes varied in academic qualifications (strong, moderate, or weak) as well as race (White, Chinese, or Malay). The participants were tasked with evaluating the warmth, competence and qualifications of the candidates portrayed in the resumes, and then recommend a monthly salary for the job applicant.

The study observed that Chinese participants rated Malay applicants as less competent, less suitable for the job, and recommended a lower salary than equally qualified Chinese applicants. This effect was found regardless of the strength of academic qualifications. At the same time, Chinese participants rated White applicants as equally competent, more suitable for the job, and recommended a higher salary than equally qualified Chinese applicants.

These results show that Chinese participants discriminated against Malay applicants, which may be explained by Chinese participants acting on their negative stereotypes of Malays (i.e. less competent).

On the other hand, they discriminated in favour of White applicants, demonstrating Pinkerton syndrome – characterised as the preference for Whites because of the positive stereotypes associated with them, such as being novel, interesting, socially refined, and intelligent.

Pinkerton syndrome is likely caused by two factors:

Colonial mentality – a form of internalised oppression, characterised by a perception of ethnic or cultural inferiority due to a history of colonisation by Western powers
Colourism – the system that privileges the lighter skinned over the darker skinned people within a community of colour
These findings may help explain why, for example, Malay households have a significantly lower median monthly household income compared to Chinese and Indians in Singapore2.

Dr Chew shares, “Singaporeans seem to be divided into two categories: The first category insists that racism is no longer an issue whereas the second category acknowledges the presence of racism but is reluctant to talk about it.”

So, what can we do? Dr Chew says that “the first step that we must take is to acknowledge that racism is still an issue, and to be willing to have extensive discussions about it.”

He also suggests that Singapore could carry out something similar to what Australia has done to address the inequality between the indigenous and non-indigenous people: “the government could release a 10-year plan, complete with concrete goals e.g. reduce income disparity between Malays and other races by half within the next 5 years, to reduce racial disparities.”

James Cook University remains committed to creating a better life for our communities. That means continuing to grow our education and research programs, so that societies are better equipped to deal with change, emergencies, and the situations that make them vulnerable. The University has zero tolerance for those who seek to divide society based on differences in race, ethnicity or religion.

In ‘Race, racism and racial privilege in Singapore’ (The Straits Times, September 2021) Professor Chua Beng Huat (NUS Sociology and Yale-NUS Urban Studies Program) discusses the conceptual development of racial privilege in Singapore, documents developments in Singapore’s history that have accorded privileges, conscious and unconscious, to specific racial groups, and evaluates the frameworks and solutions the state has adopted to maintain racial harmony. He points out that ethnic groups are defined by their shared heritage and common cultural attitudes and behaviors, which are passed on within familial and community settings. Singaporeans are familiar with the defining cultural practices of the city-state’s major ethnic groups. Prof Chua attributes the understanding of different cultural practices as contributing to Singapore’s multiethnic harmony.

On the other hand, Singaporeans’ conceptual familiarity with race is the result of a state-developed framework for understanding differences in physical qualities, which citizens have been socialized into. Prof Chua asserts that racism in Singapore is the development of irrational prejudices stemming against differences in physical traits rather than negative attitudes based on our understanding of different cultural practices. Interestingly, he also explains that most Singaporeans, however, have limited deep knowledge of their own ethnic history and culture. While we recognize the defining elements of an ethnic group, we lack an understanding of the cultural and philosophical underpinnings of their practices, attitudes, and behaviors.

Debates about whether ‘Chinese privilege’ exists on Singapore’s shores have drawn ire from citizens. Prof Chua elucidates the generational differences in attitudes towards the idea of ‘Chinese privilege’ in Singapore. Older Chinese Singaporeans, educated in Chinese schools, remember the state’s attempts to devalue the Chinese language and modernist Chinese culture, resulting in the closure of Singapore’s only private Chinese-medium university, Nanyang University. In addition, these Singaporeans also recall how their Chinese education and low levels of literacy prevented them from gaining employment in the civil service. Prof Chua asserts that Special Assistance Plan Schools, now concretized as an example of ‘Chinese privilege’, are seen by older Chinese Singaporeans as state compensation for coordinated attacks on their culture and livelihoods in the past. This has generated resistance towards the idea of ‘Chinese privilege’ in Singapore.

The government’s commitment to meritocratic principles, embedded in the country’s education policies, increased opportunities available to the Chinese in Singapore. Chinese families realized the importance of an English-medium education and enrolled their children in government public schools. The statistical dominance of the Chinese and their increased proficiency in the language of administration inevitably resulted in the Chinese taking up jobs across in the civil service and different industries and sectors. Chinese Singaporeans started to occupy the range of the economic spectrum.

Prof Chua emphasizes that the ideological dominance of meritocracy creates a tendency for elitism, promotes eugenicist thinking, and rigidifies current socioeconomic structures; its reification observed in social and income inequality, and structural impediments to social mobility in the country. In weighing the solutions to correct structural privileges, he explains that meritocracy is currently the most reliable resource allocation mechanism that prevents corruption. He advocates for building systems that ensure each child is given an equal starting point. On Singapore’s punitive laws to punish racist acts, Prof Chua notes that the country has sufficient legal instruments to stop them. The racist views of individuals cannot be taken to represent the views of the entire ethnic group, he points out. Instead, he stresses that punishment should be used sparingly and that racist confrontations should be resolved between individual parties.